In relation to taking away substances from work

http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=1972-02-04a.833.0&s=paraquat#g895.1

Orders of the Day - Employed Persons (Safety) Bill
Robens Report - mentioned frequently - often in terms of "Wait for Robens to see what it recommends"

John Osborn Sheffield, Hallam

The Sheffield coroner, Dr. Pilling wrote to me in January this year, following one more case, enclosing copies of inquisitions returned in each case, together with summaries of the relevant backgrounds. He says: In the first place, this was an unusually Large number for one year in my jurisdiction. Second, the availability of individual poisons varies from one district to another. Cyanide is more readily obtainable in Sheffield than in most places and is not, therefore, a national problem. On the other hand, I understand that industrial solvents, such as carbon tetrachloride, present similar problems elsewhere, and that paraquat is a not uncommon cause of death in agricultural areas. He adds that he realises that there are difficulties in controlling substances which are used in enormous quantities, but he is informed that such difficulties are not insuperable.

The coroner gave me an account of the four verdicts on people who had died after taking away cyanide, for one reason or another, from their place of work, and he suggested—I know that my hon. Friend has raised this with the Home Secretary—that it should be an offence for certain people to have unauthorised possession of toxic substances so as to discourage them from taking such material away from their place of work.

I have been in touch with the British Safety Council and RoSPA, and I have had a lengthy reply also from my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State. I think it right to mention these matters in the context of the Bill before us. In his letter, my hon. Friend said: The Factory Inspectorate give advice to factory occupiers about storage of toxic substances such as cyanide. Users are normally advised to keep the stock of cyanide under lock and key, to ensure that process workers wear protective clothing and make use of washing facilities. A copy of the cautionary notice which, in general, is displayed in every factory with a cyanide hazard is enclosed. I have here the cautionary notice, and I see precaution No. 6: Cyanide must be stored in a place accessible only to authorised persons". Incidentally, this is Notice No. S.H.W.385.

My hon. Friend said that this matter was being looked into by the committee under Lord Robens. It is appropriate that, when considering industrial safety, we should bear in mind the danger of toxic materials used in industrial processes. I have well in mind the point made by many hon. Members, including my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West, about the need to be careful with new materials and processes using new materials until we know very much more about them.

I readily acknowledge that there is now a far greater need for both management and shop floor to pay careful attention to safety precautions in our factories. Even so, I suggest that it can fairly be said that this country is more safety conscious and more desirous of not causing illness or injury at the place of work than is almost any other country in the world. But this still does not prevent the need to use any device possible to put this country in the van in this area demanding humanitarian considerations.

I am certain that a Bill of this type is useful and desirable. However, I urge that its implementation should wait until we have considered the Robens Report, though I agree that legislation of this nature reaching the Statute Book to become operative in two or three years might not do any harm, since there would be thereby the value of an intensive Committee stage. For that reason, although I cannot support the Bill, certainly I shall not vote against it.