Health and Safety at Work
11 March 1983

concerns Paraquat and home, but does not mention women as working at home. 

Mr Peter Mills (Devon West)
...There is also a problem with sprays. The farming world uses more and more of them and they are sophisticated and dangerous. One must be careful to ensure that farmers and farm workers protect themselves against such sprays, as they can cause a great deal of damage. Moreover, there is a problem with left-over chemicals and sprays. Whenever one uses sprays or chemicals on a farm, there is always some left over. Some of them are highly toxic and dangerous. One of the most dangerous is paraquat, which looks like lemonade. Unfortunately, the left-over spray is sometimes put into lemonade or ginger beer bottles and put on a shelf so that it can be used later either on the farm or for killing weeds in the garden. The danger is that children think that the contents of the lemonade, ginger beer or coca-cola bottles can be drunk. Paraquat is fatal and there is no cure for it. The victim's lungs seize up solid. That problem must be taken seriously. It is important that left-over sprays should not be kept in small bottles and stocked away. It is right that I should warn the House of that danger. I am sure that the commission is always on the alert for it....

Mr John Gummer (Eye)
... As I represent an agricultural constituency, I should not like to miss the opportunity of dealing with the points raised by my hon. Friend the Member for Devon, West (Sir P. Mills). Althouh I dislike the word "obscenity" in a campaigning sense, I would use it in regard to the practice of carelessly putting a dangerous chemical such as paraquat into lemonade bottles. It is an example of the sort of damage that can so easily arise not only on farms but in other establishments. I underline the absolute necessity to protect third parties, and especially those who are too young to know about the danger of drinking paraquat. There are also problems arising from dangerous litter, and in relation to forestry and in other areas. ...

Mr John Gorst 11.22am
... I agree with the motion, but I regret that it relates only to health and safety at work. I wish that it dealt with health and safety at work, at home and everywhere else. It is part of the tradition of reforms in this country that we do things step by step, rather than making wholesale changes. Perhaps we should start pressing for the legislation that was passed only for those at work to be extended to the home and to leisure activities.

The hon. Member for Hackney, South and Shoreditch told us about a constituent who was hit by a piece of falling scaffolding. She was not at work, but she is as entitled to protection as are those who were at work and were creating the danger. ...

... The Select Committee was also interested in section 6 of the Act which imposes general duties on manufacturers, designers, importers and suppliers of articles and substances for use at work to ensure that such articles or substances are safe and without risk to health. We have recently been examining the position of people who work at home. I believe that the time has come for more urgent steps to be taken to ensure that at least the substances and machinery which are supplied to people who work at home should conform to the strictest standards of safety. Whether this is done through the health and safety at work legislation or whether it is done under the legislation which I hope will be enacted, which will take no account of where people are because they are entitled to the same protection in terms of safety, is immaterial to me. What matters is that action should be taken without delay. I hope that my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State for Employment will also have something to say about that when he comes to reply. ...

invokes Flixborough and media coverage. 



