Paraquat Poisoning
Oral Answers to Questions — Social Services

 14 Nov 1972


Mr Robert Hughes (Aberdeen North)
asked the Secretary of State for Social Services how many people have died from Paraquat poisoning since this product has been marketed; and if he will make a statement.


Mr Michael Alison (Barkston Ash)
Since this product was marketed in 1962 there have been 30 deaths in England and Wales where Paraquat or one of the products containing it was mentioned on the death certificate. Of these 10 are known to have been accidental. I will circulate detailed figures in the OFFICIAL REPORT.
e)
Total Persons	Suicide	Accidental	Open Verdicts
										Male	Female	Male	Female	Male	Female
1966	…	…	…	1			—	—	—	1	—	—
1967	…	…	…	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
1968	…	…	…	4	1	2	—	1	—	—
1969	…	…	…	11	6	1	1	1	1	1
1970	…	…	…	3	1	—	1	1	—	—
1971	…	…	…	11	4	1	2	2	2	—
Total Persons	…	30	16	10	4

Mr Robert Hughes (Aberdeen North)
Is the hon. Gentleman aware that the patent for Paraquat expires soon and that if, as seems likely, it is




not extended, any company will then be free to produce this dangerous substance? In view of the figures which the hon. Gentleman has just announced, which incidentally are much lower than those quoted in a magazine article last week, what contingency plans has he to control the situation?


Mr Michael Alison (Barkston Ash)
I think the magazine article the hon. Gentleman refers to probably contains figures of the world incidence of deaths rather than the figures for England and Wales. If the ICI patent is not extended, manufacturers who manufacture Paraquat in its most lethal—that is to say, concentrated—form will be subject to the limitations already imposed on its general sale.

Sir Gerald Nabarro (Worcestershire South)
Is my hon. Friend satisfied that the present limitations imposed are effective? Does he not realise that a death occurred at Evesham, Worcestershire, a matter of a couple of years ago when concentrated Paraquat was consumed from a Coca Cola bottle, which is a common occurrence and has been the cause of death on many occasions, and that the reply of the appropriate Government Department was that the labelling of this substance was already adequate?


Mr Michael Alison (Barkston Ash)
The labels on the concentrate already carry the message Do not put in soft drink bottles. and Keep away from children. In addition we are seeking ways of making the liquid itself so obnoxious to smell and taste that the taking of it would be repulsive.
