PARAQUAT: SALE AND USE PRECAUTIONS

HL Deb 04 November 1975 vol 365 cc990-2 990
§ 2.51 p.m.

§The Earl of KINNOULL My Lords, I beg leave to ask the Question which stands in my name on the Order Paper.
§ The Question was as follows:

§ To ask Her Majesty's Government whether they will consider the banning of sale to the general public of the weed killer known as paraquat in view of the recent tragic accidents.

§Lord STRABOLGI My Lords, the Government look to the Advisory Committee on pesticides and other toxic chemicals for advice on safety precautions for this and other similar products. These precautions already include provision under which sales of the liquid formulation can be made only to those who require the supplies for the purpose of their trade or business. Within the last year the Advisory Committee has reviewed the use of paraquat. In the light of its findings the Government are not intending to alter the present provisions.
§The Earl of KINNOULL My Lords, I thank the noble Lord for that reply, but could he say, first, how many accidents have occurred in the past two years as regards to weed killer; and, secondly, is there a known antidote?
§Lord STRABOLGI My Lords, I have not got the figures for the past two years; they are not yet available. But over the last seven years for which figures are available—that is, 1966 to 1973—there have been 61 deaths of which, I regret to say, over half were suicides, and in regard to another 10 open verdicts were recorded. There is no known antidote, but the product is subject to the Act dealing with poisons, and the Advisory Committee is satisfied that Paraquat is perfectly 991 safe provided it is used in accordance with the recommendations on the label. I welcome this opportunity to urge all those who handle the product to observe the precautions printed on the label and, in particular, not to decant it into any other container.
§Baroness SUMMERSKILL My Lords, can my noble friend tell us a little more about why the Committee refrained from taking any action with regard to these lethal weed killers?
§Lord STRABOLGI My Lords, this is not the only product which is lethal if it is mishandled. But there is no known case where paraquat has killed anybody when the precautions have been observed. There are other products of this kind which are very necessary in agriculture; of course strychnine, for killing moles, comes immediately to mind.
§Baroness SUMMERSKILL My Lords, can my noble friend say how it is proposed to protect children and people who are perhaps a little abnormal mentally, who have little difficulty in obtaining this product in tool sheds or wherever it is kept?
§Lord STRABOLGI My Lords, this is subject to the Pharmacy and Poisons Act of 1933. Paraquat can be sold only by an authorised seller of poisons, that is a pharmacist, or by a listed seller who must be registered with the local authority. The seller must know the purchaser to be a person to whom paraquat may properly be sold.
§Lord ALLERTON My Lords, would not the noble Lord agree that paraquat is an essential form of pesticide for certain types of agriculture, and that for that reason its continuing use will be justified?
§Lord STRABOLGI Yes, my Lords; of course the noble Lord is perfectly right. Paraquat has been of immense value in sustaining crop yields. In many situations—for example, for direct drilling which can avoid ploughing—there is no alternative to this product; and home food production would suffer if we were to restrict its use.
§Lord BURNTWOOD My Lords, is my noble friend aware that paraquat is 992 sold under a different name as a weed killer and that the print that is attached to its container is not very easy to read?
§Lord STRABOLGI Yes, my Lords, my noble friend is of course quite right, paraquat is sold under the name "Gramoxone", which is the name used by its manufacturer.
