Ch6 Chlorine Disinfectionand Therories of disease 
Anna Lewcock, Fiona Scott-Kerr and Elinor Mathieson p 179-219
iin
An Element of controversy
The life of chlorine in science, medicine, technology and War. 

first fumigations carried out by  Guyton de Morveau in 1773- disinfected the cathedral at Dijon, using salt and sulphice acid to give hydrochloric to neutralise the miasma given off by decaiying bodies
not until beginning of the 20th centure that Cl was indorudced as a disinfectant in water. 
didn’t know how it worked, until germ theory was established and microscopic observation of bacteria became routine
difficult to measure the effectiveness  of disinfection - controvers about how well they worked
harmful effects [presumably on users though this isn’t said]

England - James Carmichael Smtyh used nitrous acd in 1780 in churches prisons and hospitals, published use of disinfectant in 1795, won an award

presumably the publicity of the award drew Jon Johnstone out of the woodwork to say that his fathe rJames, Dr in Kidderminster, used acid fumigation as early as 1750s to deal with gaol fever. 

William Cruickshank used chlorine to purify water in 1800 - first in Englnd. 

Antoine Germain Labarraque - chlirdes of soda and lime as disinfecting agent in early 1820s. skin ulcers, in the toilet, as injections , for washing cloth dressings, for washing hands and for appling to the nose when dealing with the isick. Leave plates of the solution in rooms, change daily. though he did not have a theoruy of why it had these powers.

Typhus - chlorides were effective in preventing spread of disease from patient to physician

Edwin Chadwick named as introducing chlorine in general hygeine, but does not give a speicfic 

p186  Henry Bollman Condy
use of disinfection not a common practice - 1862
malignant fever in Liverpool - spread could have been preented  in 1861
identified various substances in use as disinfectants prior to own work, including chlorin, hypchlorite of lime, nitrous acid, superseded with the almost exclusive use of chloine. 
not a very good neutraliser. 
serious objections of irritating and corrosive action on animal and veg life. 
alternative to chlorine - markeded a solution of alkaline permanganates “Condy’s Patent Fluid or Natural Disinfectant”
poss denounce others in order to promote his own mixture but “villanous odour”
“seen two cases of fatal cases of accidental poisoning by Burnett’s chloride of zinc. I the farm and the kennel great care would be necessary to prevent accidents from bottles and saucers of this highly poisonous and corrosive fuildi being left about. 
  				is this branded as Burnett’s chloride of zinc? think it must be - Lancet call it by this specific name quite a few times. 
people mistook liquid prep as fluid of magnesia or gin.  

p187 *Family Herald* reported o1858 - great number of accidents even death from the chloride disinfectors now in use. 

disinfection as neutralisation - Condy and Guyton, Beddoes

Lister - carbolic acid used to control decomposition of sewage in Carlisle he began to sue crude carbolic (German creosote) in wound dressing. Though he did not use chlorine or cl compounds the acceptanc o of his antiseptic system boosted fortunes of chem disinfection in general , ading the acceptance of chlorine disinfection. 


late 1880s commercially available disinfectants included Sanitary Fluid, John H Fuller of Reading; Calvert’s Carbolic Acid and preparations, Calvert & Co Mcr; Jeyes Fluid, Jeys Sanitary Compounds Co, Cannon St London;  Lysol Antseptic and disinfectnat for sugical and gernal use; Odamine Disinfectant Fluid Powder, Row an dTaylor, Norwich 1896; The Government Disinfectant,  a Pink carbolic Powder, The Government Sanitary Co, est 1866 - Disinfectants epemera box 1 wellcome library for the history and understanin of medicine london. 

p202
Bronson argued that the use of chlorine was not only dangerous in itself, but that by wekaening the respiratory system it would make people more susceptible to disease. Tirade against Cl disinffection

203
false sense of securty - cl masked the smell of nxious effluvia
with the avent of disinfectants people’s genearl level of cleanliness and hygeine was falling = “washing and scouring with soap and water, ventilation, sweeping scraping and removing were abandoned not only as costly but as bhind the improvements of the age”. People were placeing their faith in this new, supposedly 
scienfici method of keeping clean. 

In 1832 The lancet published a lenghty artilce - arpprove dor even written by Thomas Wakley editor, waging a war against quackery - proofs that cl gas posses no antipestilential properted   “Chlorin Gas in Discussion The Lancet vol 17 issue 438 21 Jan 1832  around p597-599

p211
proof of cl efficiency seen in workers at bleachworks or chl or cloirde mfc often had “ruddy healthy faces”

Nothing on what the domestic uptake or uses of these chlorine disinfectants were, or what the domestic accpetance or everyday use (as opposed to professional acceptance) was, other than that if people are being accidentaly poisoned, they must be keeping the products in the house, and if they attempt suicide they must have a notion that it is a noxious substance. 

 