Gardening Hazard 
Sir,?The following gardening hazard seems to be worth 
reporting. 
A patient was recently brought to me suffering from exten 
sive burns of her fingers. She had been about to start a 
bonfire and removed one of her gloves to strike a match. 
No sooner had she done this than there was a series of 
small explosions and intense pain in the gloved hand. Think 
ing the whole box of matches had caught fire, she threw it 
away and tore off the glove. In so doing she also burned 
the ungloved hand. Later, the box of matches was picked 
up intact. The gloves had been cleaned several times in 
Germany and were evidently thoroughly impregnated with some highly inflammable chemical.
EM Town-Jones
Farnham Surrey

Gardening Hazard
Author(s): E. M. Town-Jones
Source: The British Medical Journal, Vol. 1, No. 5034 (Jun. 29, 1957), p. 1532


Sir,
The gardening gloves mentioned in Dr. E. M. Town 
Jones's letter (Journal, June 29, p. 1532) had no doubt been 
impregnated with sodium chlorate used as a weed-killer. 
Being relatively non-poisonous it is commonly regarded as 
harmless. It is, however, so inflammatory that a solution 
splashed on gardening gloves, shoes, or the legs of one's 
Saturday afternoon trousers can become dangerous, and Dr. 
Town-Jones's letter is a useful reminder of this fact. Sodium 
chlorate is much used in the manufacture of fireworks.? 
I am, etc., 
London, S.E.18. T. C. SCOTT WEBB. 
Sir,
The accident reported by Dr. E. M. Town-Jones 
(Journal, June 29, p. 1532) under this heading is probably 
more purely a gardening hazard than his letter suggests. 
Had the gloves worn by his patient been used previously 
when handling sodium chlorate as a weed-killer ? This sub 
stance is usually used in solution, but when allowed to dry 
in contact with an organic material (such as leather or 
cloth) it becomes highly inflammable, even explosive. 
I am, etc., 
Ballanard. I.O.M. B. B. HARRISON.

Gardening Hazard
Author(s): T. C. Scott Webb and B. B. Harrison
Source: The British Medical Journal, Vol. 2, No. 5036 (Jul. 13, 1957), p. 104