In Search OF Wonder
What Next? 

p277
“We had forgoten that a previous boom in magazine science fiction was accompanid i Hollywooed not by movies about adventureres in spaceships, but by something quiet different: movies about the drafty old castle, the eerie flasks adn retorts, the crashing sparks, the deformed servant, andd avoe all the shifty seyed scientitst...
The humbling turth is that science fiction is only for the small number of people who like to think and who regard the universe with awe, which is a mixture of love and fear. “The public” does neither; it wasnt to be spoon fed by its magazines and movies, 
p178
and it regards the universe with horror, which is a blend of fear and hate. 
...
it seems altogether likely that the two mose successful science fiction” books of 1956 will turn out to be The Power by Frank Robinson and the Shrinking Man bt Richard Metheson. ... TSM was bought by Universal -International before publicaion and MAtheson himself wrote he screen-pla. these are matters to make the average SF writer’s tongue hang out; so it seems imprt to ask “How did they do it?”
Fro one hing, by avoidign the science fiction label. The MAtheson book is introduced simply as a “tale of horror”...


book has Scott shinking exactly one severnth of an inch every day. This means he knows exactly how long he has to go until the end. 
Grudge bearing black widow spider. he spider has only seven legs, Carery has previously knocked off the other one witha stone, like an Ahabin revers. 

At five sevenths of an inceh Carey is just about one onehundredth of his former six feet. everything around him ought to appear one hundred times its former size. Thiseems like a simple enough relaion to bear in mind - 1ft = 100 ft but matheson writes on fp24 Twelve inches, and yet to him it was the equivalent of 150 feet to a normal sized man. 
On the next page we find Carey staring up awestruck at the towering heirhg of a refrigerator, as “high as a ten story building” i.e. 100 feet or exactly 12 inches on Carey’s scale.  [picks various size issues to pieces]

the most strikign lapse in logic for readers who have seen this sugject handled before in science fiction is Mathesons neglect of the square cube law [re. impacts of gigantic water drops]

Alice in Wonderland - when he is the wrong size to climbe he cellar steps, the door is open, when the’s thre reight size the door is hut. 
Why did the omvies buy ths bad book? Becuase it has a Creature in it - the afeorsaid Black Widow spider. 

Matheson’s gnormance and distrust of science [has previously picked on how he could have bothered to find out how antibodies are made but just made it up in I am Legend, plus the maths and physcis stuff] are as profound as Bradbury’s but Robinson is almost the typs of the pure science fiction writer. he majored in physics, spent his nvy hitch as an electronics technician, its not accidnetal that two such different writers should produe books so essentially similar. This is not just bad sicence fiction, its something else althoghter.

It’s antiscience fiction: a turning away, not merely from the standard props of science fiction (which are retained as vestiges) but from the habits of though an belief which underlie science itself - the assumption that things can be put into categories (Power resists classification) tha things can be measure (cf. Matheson’s indifference to common arithmetic) the assumption of cause and effet (Mathesons’ almost contemptuously perfunctory of the shinking man “radioactive spray plus insect spray uniting by a kind of magical miscergeneation into a toxin). 
Matheson has evidently read the Britannica article on black widos and tells you twoards the end of the book that “naturally reticient and secretive they build their webs n he most dark, secluded corners” this after having the same spider chase Carey all over the cellar like a dog after a chickn. There’s no rational motive involved when Carey reverses roles to go hunting the spidea on his last days and Matheson’s attempts to make sense of the event int these terms are palpably false