The Incredible Shrinking Man
1957  - Lutts 1985 - not true science fiction, but a modern version of gothic horror. 

Opening sequence features mushroom cloud - when the book was published in 1956 there had already been a decade of nuclear testing. There was fasincation, pride, not a major concern about public health ((Lutts 1985) there were nuclear test parties, hairdos, beauty competitions in the US. Radioactive fall out was a part of peoples lives in the US. Britain tested its bombs in Australia and the US - 1952 − 1958, so perhaps it wasn’t so immediately visible here, but there would have been television/ cinema footage of the dramatic and increasingly familiar shorthand - mushroom cloud. 

Insecticides - before Silent Spring published 1963 but concern was possibly already building following gypsy moth and malaria interventions

————
He watches the cloud disinterestedly, then with concern, he stands up to get a better look and also recieves a full body exposure as a mist starts to engulf the boat. He seeks shelter behind the cockpit, but does not enter the boat. Is left covered in a residue, which seems to sparkle (though is possibly jsut wet). [Here, the pollution was not invisible, it could be watched and it left a noticable residue. In 1954 a Japanese fishing boat the Lucky Dragon (or Fifth Lucky Dragon?) got caught in a cloud of radioactive fallout - Strontium 90 which gets incoproated into bone and teeth was found to be part of this. In 1956 Newsweek was reporting that Sr-90 invisible bone hiting particles that can never be removed. had already been propelled into the atmosphere (Lutts 1985)]

6 months passes. 
His clothes are too big - has the cleaner given him the right ones? They have his monogram on them, they must be.  [does not do laundry at home - sends it out]
Anger towards his wife, gaslighting could be a possibility, the way she shrugs off and denies any changes, “loosing weight and its very becoming”. 1938 stage play and 1940 and 44 film versions. Well established device, at least in fiction. 

asks to pick up a bathroom scale - technology - not already have one - we later see him use it once, loosing 4 pounds. 

In Drs surrgery, Dr tries to reassure him that there could be reasons for an error in past measurements, meaning he was never 6 ft 1.  These include standing erect, being measured in the morning. 

Wife says she’ll start him on vitamins and feed him up on cake and icecream.
		This suggests that vitamins as a pill or liquid supplement were what she means, and that she has knowledge that these are valuable to human health. When did vitamin supplements become readily available?

Own Dr does X-rays over time, compares them to confirm that he is shrinking. Had previously stated that people don’t just shrink. 

You can’t tell me anything I haven’t already imagined. 

No medical precedent

Refers him to Medial Research Institute wehere an intensive 3 week battery of tests is undertaken. They are named in all their technological glory. 
	barium drink
	stood behind fluoroscope screen
 	drank radioactive iodine and had an exam with a geiger counter
 	electrodes on his head
 	water restriction tests
 	brotein bond tests
 	blood cultures
 	xrays and more xrays
 	paper chromatography test  - hold long strip of wet paper, up to clothed patient in lab, dots blood onto the paper? Waits for it to dry, expects phospholipids, creatine aminio acids proteina nd cholesterol. 
 	sees something that doesn’t fit, rushes to microscope, calls other drs over. 
 	
 	A rearrangemtn of the molecture structure of your cells
 	Like a cancer?
 	More like an anticancer, a diminuation of all the cells in proportion
 	
 	[nuclear preocupation of the period 1954 −1963 surfaced at all cultural levels form the poetry of Robert Lowell and the meditations of Thomas Mertson to such TV shows as The Outer Limits an Rod Serling’s the Twilight Zone. Those shows when not dealiing explicity  with radioactivity, genetic mutation and atomic war, conjured up tales of vauge unseen menacees. Numer of sf stories dealing with nuclear war increased dramatically from the mid 1950s through the early 1960s dimishing sharply thereafter. A spate of mutatnt moves in these years had clear psychological roots in the rears of genetic damage from radioactive fallout.”p824 Boyer 1984
 	
 	Radiation was used to explain many wonderful things, from giant insects to walking trees to resurrecting the dea. this was not a form of nuclear paranoia, merely cheap and simple plotting. on p240 Big bug movies of the 1950s quoting Bill Warren Keep watching the Skies! American Sci Fi Moves of the Fiftiesl Vol 1 1950 −1957
 	
 	Tell me something, have you ever been esposed to a germ spray, in particular an insectcide, a great deal of insecticide
 	recalls a truck spraying treess
 	No, that was only the beginning, something happened to that insecticide after it gor into your systedm From a mildly virulent germ spray it created a deadly chemical reveral. 
 	Have you been exposed to any sort of radioactivity
 	Oh no of course not, I don’t do any work of that kind
 		That day we were on the boat
 	The mist...
 	
 	[Here, if the insectidie had never been encountered, if there had not been some kind of chemical interaction, the radiation would probably have gone unnoticed. Here it is different to storeis that rely on only radiation as the device. Lutts describes how Carson compares fallout to pesticides. He does not say anything bout them interacting.]
 	[Heretical reading of big bug cinema - “they were about... giant insects” unease about sincet infestation and humankinds abilit to control id during the 1950s and 1960s that pre silent spring heydey of DDT and sweepign govt pest control offensives... (p246) vocabulary and imageary of pest control merged with lang of Cold War - war on insects(p247) “pesticide hazard ‘may well rank in seriousness of adverse effects with the dangers of radioactive fall-out’”p249 insecticides don’t work - need something stronger, only knocks them out - generally have to use “low tech non chemical non technocratic tools 0 water electriity convenient volcanic eruption or a goo old squashing: p250 “it is no wonder that Hollywood stopped making giant insect films at just abou tht every time that RC Silent Spring was published. by the early 1960s it ha become clear that the potential of chemical insecticides and the threat of insect hoards overrunning humanity had both been wildly exaggerated” p250 Tstsui]
 	
 As long as the wedding ring is on - immediately falls off  [technology/symbol]
 
 Lost his job - not really to do with his size though?
 
 Reporters pay for the story, it’ll break anyway  [scientific curiosity, health reporting, media scare? then goes on to collect all clippings in a scrap book, writes own version as therapy]
 
Apply for an unlisted line please - telephone technology

TV truck - outside broadcast

Maybe we’ve forgotten how to hope.
Scott there’s so much to hope for any day now the Drs might find the antitoxin

Louise makes her own clothes in the basement
Should we assume he is wearing clothes she made for him, or  bought childrens clothes?

Antitoxin - dark fluid drawn into large syringe
We’re working iwth unknown factors, nothing is gauarnteed. There’s a 50% chance this could work, 50% jus have to pray.

Has stopped shrinking, coming to terms with it through writing, though ‘needs’ wife (book version is more detailed about this), meets a midget, discusses how its different because she grew up that way. Opens a window on a world of small people, Tiny Tina, Clarice.

Doesn’t go back to the doctor to top up on antitoxin - couldn’t it have just worn off? Instead moves into dolls house. 

Louise given sedative by nurse after thinking Scott eaten by cat

Scott in basement - earth basement, drain in floor, storage space
Doesn’t really seem like a good place for dressmaking but it ws a useful reason to have all the useful kit for Scott here. 

Mousetrap - technology has become dangerous
Stored paints - some in reused cans
Matches - strike anywhere
Sewing box - pins become weapons and tools
Spider and cat - nature has become dangerous
[can’t see any insecticide or poisons here... just paint]

So I would dominate my world as man has dominated the world of the sun - domination through technology (pins, thread) (atomic weapons, medicine, etc)
[Hendershot - mentions Aaron Levenstein’s pamphlet The atomic Age: suicide... slavery or social planning “For the first time in man’s long journey out of the dark cave in which he started, the bright sun awaits him.”

With these weapons I was a man again. I would not die like an insect. [sprayed with insecticide]

[it was not a spider] It was every fear in the world 


Had the feeling of instinct, each thought, each movment tuned to some great directing force.

I was shrinking, to become what - the infinitisemal? What was I? Was I still a human being? Or was I the man of the future? If there were other bursts of radiation, other clouds drifting accross seas and continents, would other beings would follow me into this vast new world? So close, the infinteisml and the infinite. But suddenly I knew they were really the two ends of the same concept. The unbelievably small and the unbelievably vast vventually meet like the closign of a gigantic circle. I looked up as if somehow I would grasp the heavens, the universe, worlds beyond number. 
Gods silver tapestry spread across the night. And in that moment I knew the answer to the riddle of the infinite. I had thought in terms of mans own limited dimension, I had presumed upon nature, that exisitence begins and ends is mans conception, not natures. and I felt my body dwindling melting becoming nothing. My fears melted away and in their place came acceptance. All this vast majesty of creation, it had to mean something, then I meant something too. Yes, smaller than the smallest, I meant somethign too. To God there is no zero, I still exist. [image of supernova, or nuclear burst, not sure - surrounded by other points of light so probably space and super nova/ formation]




Review of Matheson’s novel by Damon Knight - this is poular becuas they are irrational and antiscientific, inconsistent diminution of the hereo, one of the novels faults that is not repoeated in the film. (Hodgens 1959, Film Quarterly)  

“Motion picture adaptations have ruined any number of good works of lierature without casting a pall in the public mind over lit in genearl .the sciene fiction films houwever seem to have come close to ruiing g the reputation of the category of fiction from which they have malignantly sprouted. To the film audience, science fiction means horror distinguised form ordinary horror only by a relative lack of plausibility.
Science fiction involves extrapolated or fictious science, or fictiious use of scientific possibiities or it smay be simply fiction that takes place in the future or intorudces som eradical assumption about teh presnet or the past.
....Science fiction [writing]... calls for a plausible or at least possible premise, logically developed. The most damnig criticism one can make of a work of  science fiction is that it is flatly impossible in the first place and inconcsistent in the sectond”. 

Sicence fictions films follwo different conventions. The premis is alwasy flatly impossible. Any explanations offered are either false analogy or entirely meaninglyess. 

Although antiscientific printied sci fi exoistsm most sci fi relects at least an awareness and appreciatation of science. Somesome ... dispaly uncomprehenein g faith in sci and implies tha tit will solve all problems magically. But in the sf films ther is rearely any sane middle ground. Now and then, scienc is white magic, . But far more often  it is black and if these films have any gnernal implications about science they are that science and scientists are dangerous, raising problesma dn provoking disaster for the innocent, ignorant good folks and that curiosity is a deadly sin. 




 
 
 
 


