Detergents
what they are and what they do
Donald Price
Chemical Publishing Co Inc
New York NY 
1952

addresses reader / housewife directly, with pretty technical book on detergents, with some nice descriptions, little cartoons, brand names and locations are not mentioned, just general principles trying to demystify the “ballyhoo” about synthetic and soapless detergents. States that book came from speaking to public groups about detergents, definitely a science communication thing. Wonder how widely this type of thing was read? Was in Advertising Association’s library. 


p134
Soap affects skin less than other detergents
Heavy duty - balanced combination of ingredients, versatile cleaners, best for clothes washing and dishwashing. Contain synthetic dets so none is wasted by reacting with hard warter
p135
Abrasive cleaners - use w discretion. Not use on glassware porelain tile, enamel finishes or lino unles specifically stated. 

 non soap package cleaners based on inorganic phosphates - variety of houseold jobs, generally have higher pH than soaps or cleaners based on syn det. esp good on porcelian tile, bathtubs and woodwork in proper dilution. Along with soap they act as builders, effective in clothes washing and dishwashing at lower cost than heavy duty detergents. 
 
stillp135
Rather than wear yourself out in a futile quest for the one detergent that will do everything geta clear understanding of what the three or four major classes of detergent are, get one of each and use it for the job it does best. 
p136
Follow the trend toward speicalisation that has been going on in industry for a long time. Obviously household cleaning jobs are not as specialised as thhose in industy but jus tthe same the rpinicple is a good one and the different cleaning jobs to be found in the household can be done ore effiently with several different kinds of cleaners than with only one. ....			
To be able to use detergents to the best advantage, you have to know as much about them as possible. 

re problem of foaming and waste water
p144 consumer looks up on foam as mark of good detergent. Sweage disposal report difficulites due to ecessive foam on aietation tanks. traceable to presnce of syndet in sewage. One town had difficulties when used a s asampling area. Wen all the free samples were used up the trouble subsided. 
p145not out of hand, actifely stydying. Known that foam can be kept down by spraying it wth water from a hose, or by adding antifoaming agents. Adjust solids content of sewage to proper level - only occurs under conditions of low solids contnetn
p146The housewife need have no fear. May safely continue to user favouirte detergent to wash clothes, do the dishers and take a bubble bath. 