Notes on Educating Consumers, Representing Consumers. 

US Bureau of Home Economics - employed scientists, many of them women  - most of the 70 positions were women, making the bureau the single largest employer of women scientists in the United States in 1939

sought to facilitate closer fit of productiona nd consuption by shaping consumer beaviour aand represetning consumers to mfcrs and retailers. Assumed rationality of consumers and that they wanted to make intelligent purches. Modern merchandising practices did not provide adequate information to do this. Also posited an ideal producer who was committed to satisfying the needs and demands of the ideal consumer. 

user orientated research - elevated the significance of women’s roles as consumers to the level of public policy. Send message that consumption was an important economic activuty significant enough to tmerit attention from a govt science program, woman’s role as maager of family’s household budget was a public responsibility. 

To be a consumer in modern America was to be in communication with and guided by a new group of experts, that they required the work and guidanc eof home economists. 

Redirect attention from manipulative advertising and towards a more utilitarian practical framework to evaluate the offerings o fthe commercial marketplace. 

Projected an identity fo consumers that challenged cultural constructions of female consumers as vain, emotional and irrational. Established standards for better living, promoting values of health, nutrition, economy and sanitation as hallmarks of middle class identy. 

1920s campaigns against waste  = intelligent buying equated to civic duty. 

p79 Findings of Bureau were disseminated through home demo extension agents, highschool teachers, editors of women’s magazines. 
p80 Live radio, travelling exhibits to promote rational cost benefit analyses as a part of homeakers daily lives and decision making proceses. Bureau published for free or small charge bulletins which covered wide range of tomics including statin removal and laundry methods, efficient kitchen arrangements and cooking insturctions. Enormous audience as reached. 1927 alone - more than two million people were sent or given bulletins by the Bureau - many many have passed these on reaching even more peopl. late 1920s recieved fifteen thousand letters annually. 

p80 Provided practical info about consumer products in support of Hooverist and New Deal initiaives  - earned a reputation as a consumers bureau. A more neutral alteranative to the GHI and othe rinstitutes operated by newspapers and women’s mags allied to advertisers. 

p81 Didn’t have the resources that they needed to tackle consumer needs comprehensively, so is a rather piecemeal and fragmented program that failed to embrace tht full range of household products available. Not all conusmers wanted to consumer rationall or master the technical aspects of these products. When homemakers requested info on specific brand names and products, the home economists were wnot allowed to share it. 

standardisation = simplified marketplace for consumer also reduce waste in industrial production 

p83 after WW1 emergence of new manufactured cellulosic fibres - lack of standard nomenclature, resemblance to fabrics created with natural fibres led to confusion about how to distinguidh one from another, what they were best suited for and how to care and maintain them. 

p84 - no clothes size standardisation - retailers faced great expenses in returns and exchanges as well as dissatisfied customers so retailers started to investigate standardising measurements and sizes. USDA resisted funding this as thought that it wsa more valuable to commercial interests than to consumers. no garment producers or retailers came forward with funds despite expressing support for the concept. 

Whether or not American consmers were interested in the bureau’s educational mesages, staff home economists did not hesitate to speak for them as a group and try to influence the design of many products based on their assumptions about what homemakers wanted and needed. p85 They used science to facilitate communication among manufcrs and retailers and conusmer. Their research was infused with the white middle class values of health, sanitation, economy and effiencey (how is this actually concluded - haven’t looked at these ethos or really the women behind them) The communication they facilitated occureed through this filter and was indirect and sometimes secretive process. 

Ultimately more influential in shaping cultural values about consumption than they were in reforming the marketlace for consumer goods. Served as pioneering consumer advoates. 