Consumerism in twentieth century britain
matthew hilton

p104
Political and Economic Planning faced difficulties involved with empowering the consumer: had to contend with the apathy of the shopper who was happy at times to be diddled.

p168
[1946 National Council of Women approached the British Standards Insittue and were granted inclusion. they quickly became disheartened by the highly technical nature of the discussion, and how space for their amateur input was not made for them. ] However the approach by the NCW to the BSI signified a broader shift in consumerism in which the middle-class housewife became the voice of the consumer interest. Cunliffe Committee 1950 recommended greater representation in the setting of standards so BSI formalised its relationship with the NCW = 1951 Women's advisory Committee

p170
the one institution which had the resources to set up such a service [consumer advisory] - the cooperative movement - lacked the imagination to step beyond an older politics of necessity. New advocates of the consumer cause were the women of the NCW. They articulated a pro-business consumerism that helped to channel consumer complaints away from more radical solutions. 

p173
BSI kite mark, harris tweet associations orb decree and the ministry of healths NH monogram for spectacle frames as well as less reputable certifications issued by the coal utilisation council, the gas council, the quality certification bureau, the lux washability bureau and the marks which proclaimed courtaulds testd quality, tebilised double tested and dylan shrink resist. such guarantees issued by private association of businesses would become one of the principal concerns of the newly organised consumer movement in the 1960s. 
This move to speak for the consumer rather than letting comma speak for themselves was inevitable outmode of the move to association that has come to dominate 20C business life as firms have attached greater importance to national lobby groups instead of local chambers of commerce. retailers flocked to various commodity and sect specific organisation the protect the position of distribution in an age of mass advertising, production, branding and pre packaging. 


Chemicals not listed as something tested by WAC, but does this mean they didn't? 

p181
an individualist mentality in which the responsibilities of the shopper were greater than those of business - women were advised to 'look before you buy' and to 'buy wisely - buy well'

BSI required the appearance of negotiation with a consumer body They set up CAC without consulting WAC, then dissolved the CAC but WAC continued to exist. This was  even though negotiation was usually explaining why WAC's proposals could not be met (e.g. standardised size, absorbency strength and sterility of sanitary towels). 

p185
1950s complaint made by many consumer actives was that mfcr simply made producs and sought a markets to sell them them

felt business did not account for were issues of safety ergonomics, value for money and independed information which would become the consumer moments own definition of the consumer interest from the late 1950s. Consumer was as much the creation of the social democrtic impulse as it was of business or professional expertise. 