Oxford Consumer
overall, very unconcerned with chemicals and their availability. Most likely a reflection on their membership driving the investigations into fresh fish, where to get coffee in town, lots of cake related topics. Very little gardening either, generally on the ranges of plants or tools offered by garden centres, with chemicals not mentioned. In connection with aerosols and leaking packaging,not bothered about the contents, only the damage to unit. Likewise, not bothered about unnecessary aerosol packaging but not being able to get out all the contents. 


Dec 64
p11
self service dry cleaning - a number of members have written to say how useful they found the two self service centres operating in OX. Concerned when an American member wrote to tell us of poss hazards. reports of 2 fatalities in America - sleeping bag dry cleaned, rolled up in car boot and used 36 hrs later. inhaled fumes from per and died. Housewife driving home with a load of dry cleaning became unconscious, killed a pedestrian. 
Mr Combey the city Chief Public health inspect carried out an immediate investigation. Plant used here gives very high extraction rate, no cause for alarm. Arranged for notices to be displayed reminding customers to air garments. suggests putting clothes in a polythene bag for transport in the car. 

March 1966
dry cleaning
p26
industry is running a 200 000 ad campaign back by ICI who supply cleaning build
one aim is to persuade men that a suit frequently used should be cleaned once a month. counter popular masculine believe that dry cleaning ruins suit and makes them wear out more quickly

dry cleaning at home not mentioned

though some people said that they washed items at home 

sep 66
carpet p7-18
p15 from recs from federation of carpet mfcr
cleaning  - Method A dry cleaning CTC or trichloroethylene apply from outer edge and work in to centre of stain. dry cleaning solvents should be used with care on carpets with rubber or plastic backings 
[no safety notes]
p16 rust stains - detergent followed by warm strong solution of oxalic acid (NB oxalic acid is a poison, the crystals should be labelled as such and kept out of the way of children) rinse with clean water and mop several times. 



no 29 March 1969 
aerosol containers
if your family never puts the top back on the toothpaste aerosol containers can be a blessing. One member who always buys Boots Freece this way became curious about the amount in the empty pack. 
weights and measures - punctured aerosol and found 15 g toothpaste. 
how many cusomter realise for instance Letha that weight stated on an aerosol can include the propellant which helps to push out the contents and this can be up to half the weigh of the whole?
[aerosl toothpaste, nothing about concern]

Spring 1985 no 93
p10
pest control services  - wanting to piano owners
learned from an experienced piano tuner re clothes moths in pianos - personal from pest control firms have been known to use gas bombs, does not kill legs and pupae, spraying mothproofer from an aerosol isn't recommends as solvent has disastrous effect on graphite used to lubricate certain parts. Naphthalene has the same effect, so mothballs are out too. Tmt by a qualified tuner will keep the felts mothproof . 