Starr, Martha

Consumption Identiy and the SocioculturalConstitution of Preferences: REading Women’s Magazines

Neoclassical - commonly take tastes as given, as either a matter of fact or of convenience. In this view, changes might seems to relect changes tastes should instead be traced to changes in wages, prices and technologies of household poruction (Stigler and Becker 1977) 

social and inst views portry indivitiuals tastes as shaped by sociocultural and instituional considerations. transmission mechanisms not well understood (Bowles, Hodgson) 

Identity useful for conceptualising interralitions between taste, social and insti facotrs and consumption. Giddens - in traditional societies lifestyles, social roles, rships and daily actiivites were largely regulated by religion, ascribed status and longstanding practicies. Modernisation has weakend thies prosciptions - more scope fore peopel to craft their identities. Consumption is an important part of this - provide signals about how you want to be seen, what one’s values are (Dolfsma 1999)

advertising and media help to establish shared banks of perceptions and images from which identities are constructed, there is a link between companies desires to sell products and the way that people self stylise. This uggests a need to see preferences as growing out of economic process in which both companies and people are agents. 

The rise in women labour force participation - a major trend in shaping preferences

Rising wages do not tell the whole story. 

Look at emergence of ‘working woman’ through examingin texts of two magaizne *Working Woman* and *Working Mother* identity emerged through both demand for ideas about how to over come percieved dissatisfactoion of trad fem identity and a supply of ideas and strategies for improving self relaisation through paid work. “Informational role” of mag, not a simple matter of making available exiting k. Mags also involve dinworking out what the working woman should look like . Stress possiliblites of products to shape identity and realise desires, esp for caring effieicnt pleasant home life.  (p293) 

Consumption deicisions reflect basci valuations of goods - reducing drudgery, satisfying physical needs, appealing to taste, tought and other senses. But conumpition is not just individual - also social , interpersonal adn moral 

Bowles 1978 - “Preferences are reasons for behaviour, attributes of the indiviuals that (Along with their beliefs and capacities) account for the actions they take in a given sitauation... Conceived in this way, preferences go considerably beyond tastes, as an adequate account of indivitual actions would have to include what Amartya Sen term commitement and John Harsayani calls moral preferences (As distinct fom personal prefs).”

if preferences are not given by underlying tastes - where do they comefrom? do they change over time? are economic processinvolve din shaping them? Socialisation and enculturation via family communiy school religion meida and other sources, become the axis around which preferences crystallise. Hodgson says that hidden persueer are isntituions genrally , not advertisers specifically 

Adult identity - sort messages of upbringin, craft pattern of consuption etc that seem emaningful, sensible, pleasurable and acceptable or feasilbe given opportinites and constraings. 

FEatherstone - conuption increasingly importatnt in signalling identiy, as increasingly anonymous and fragmented character of contemporary social life faors ways of representing oneself that use compact and wiely recognised signs. [me- short hand] 

p297 magazines for working women - attractive vehicles for advertising products that would complement working life eg convenience food, **timesaving home care products** .... Higher income [perhaps] throught to be able to afford better clases of merch. Women were apparently eager  to revise their identities

Message of needing liberation from degrating and restraining aspects of femenine pursuits in favour of the promise of self realisation and self expression through meaningful work. Dreams of fulfillment and aspirations of selfworth. 

p298 Games MOther NEver Taught You - is this just business advice? 

In the 1980s the theme of personal and social liberation through work diminished replace by amoderated version empahsiing the personal satisfactions  of working outside the home, opprtunities to demonstrate competance and to connect with the wbroader world. 

p300 one of the repeated messages was that a working mother need not do it all. earlier standards of homemakeing subordinated women and pushed them into demeaning and unnecessary work. Paring down housekeeping was not a loss esp if exploit products and practices that raise efficiency in household time. 

p302 central aspect of working woman identiy concerns efficiency in home life. Wants to attain happypleastn material env without subordinating self to others and without spendign so much time on housework. Highlight importance of self-assertion. Pre-prepared foods = tasty nutritious varied meals with minimal time and drudgery. Cleaning products shown to offer ways of keeping dishes, floors, bathrooms windows and clothing in appropriate and pleasant condition (clean, germ-free, attractive-looking, nice-smellign) with little labour time. Good quality durable goods - hh appliances, flooring, carpets, motor vehicles, avoid the time and hassles of maintenance, replacement and repair. Articles evaluate new products for potential to ameliorate balance bweteen work and family life. 

Galbraith - contrivance of consumer demand is right even if his conceptualisation of media influence on behaviour was overly simple. Produc messages figure prominentl in the process of connecting identiy to preferences and so to consumptions - not becuase they dictact to consumers what to think or feel but rather becuase they are precisely the vehicles that relate what companies want consumers to think and feel, with what resonates with them. 

Galbraith - The Affluent Society (1998)
Giddens, Modernity and Self Identity - Self and Society in the Late Modern Age (1991)
Harragan 1977 - Games Mother Never Taught You - corporate gamesmanship for women (unlikely to be useful) 
Hodgson 2003 - Hidden Persuders institutions and individuals in economic theory *Cambridge Journal of Economics* 27 (2) p 159 − 175

McKraken E 1993 - Decoding Womens Magazines - from mademoiselle to ms

O’Guinn and Shrum 1997 *Journal of Consumer Research* 23 (4) : 278 − 294  The role of television in the consturction of consumer reality 

Thompson 1996 Caring Consumers LGendered Consuption Meanigns and the Juggling Lifestyle *Journal of Consumer Research*  22 (4) 388 − 407

Sen et al Withholding Consumption: A social dilemma Perspectiv eon consumer boycotts *Journal of Consumer Research*  28 (3) 399 — 417




