Voluntary simplicity 
The post affluent society 
Amitai Etzioni Review of Social Economy
Volum LXII No3 Sept 2004
different levels - moderate (downshift consuptive rich lifestyle), strong simplification (significant restructure of lives) to holistic 

Downshift
e.g. dressing down (inexpensive attire, driving beat up cars) e.g. Bill Gates, Bruce Springsteen, DAvid and Ellen Siminoff - take pride in relativel modest tastes and inconsipuos consuption. Often this pattern is inconsisstent and limited in scope. 
Not limited to v wealthy - professionsal and other middle class are replacing dinner parties with simple meals, pot luck, take out 
lawyers cut back on billing hours race 

strong simplifiers
reduced income through giving up (by choice) high paying high status jobs. voluntary retirement in order to have more leisure. Once people reduce their incomes (bar savings, windfalls etc) they commit themselves to adjusting their consumption. 

Holistic - simple living movement
move from suburbs of cities to smaller town s the countryside, frarms and less affluent or less suburbanised parts with the explicit goal of living a simpler life. Draws on traditions of Quakers, Puritans, explicitly anticonsumerist. 

Only something that people can pursue once basic needs have been met - i.e. it is a choice that a sucessful corporate lawyer faces, not a homeless person. To urge the poor or near poor to draw satisfaction from consuming less is to ignor the profound connection between the hierachy of needs and conuption. Consumerism, not consumption is the target of voluntary simplicity. 
p417 
VSrs use fewer resources and are more liekly to recycle, build compost heaps, engage in other civic activities that favour the env. As more people become env conscious and committed they are more liekly to find VS to be a lifestyle and ideology compatible with their env concerns

Elgin D. 1993 - voluntary Simplicity . 
Durning A 1992 - How much is enough? Consumer society and the future of the EArth
Lebergott - 1993 - Pursuing Happiness American consumers int eh twentieth century 