Giddons - Consequence of modernity

p124
specific risk profile of modernity
	1) globalisation of risk - in the sense of intensity - eg nuclear war [scope of risk environment]
	2) globalisation of risk - in the sense of expanding number of contingent events which affect everyone/ large numbers of people - eg changes in division of labour [scope of risk environment]
	3) Risk stemming from the created environment, or socialised nature: the infusion of human knowledge into the material envrironment, altered character of the relation between humans and physical env.  [env]
	4) The developmet of institutionlised risk environments affecting the life chances of millions eg investment markets [env]
	5) Awareness of risk as risk: the knowledge gaps in risk cannot be converted into certainties by religious or magical knowledge  [perception]
	6) The well distributed awareness of risk: many dangers we face collectively are known to wide publics  [perception]
	7) Awareness of the limitations of expertise: no expert system can be wholly expert in terms of the consequences of the adoption of expert prinicples. [perception]
	
	How does this fit with the use of domestic chemicals?
	Possibly less important with respect to intensity, though the globaslisation which affects large numbers of people can relate to mass consumer markets, a potentially large pool of distrubuted users, and also the systems of production, distribution and retail of such goods. 
	The created envrionment as created by the use of domestic chemicals could be that we are altering the immune enhancing profile through chemcials, or making it more hygeienic reducing childhood and potentially fatal gastrointestinal upsets. ??
	Institutionalised risk environments - placing trust in a system that will retail safe and effective products through standard procedures
	People are vaguely aware of risks associated with chemicals, even if they cannot specify them, and that awareness of risks are well distributed among users though possibly more so among nonusers who have chosen not to use these things. 
	People are aware of both their own limits of expertise (eg chemical names, what exactly they do) and of others (eg manufacturers/scientists proclaiming something to be harmless when it later turns out to not be, or misjudging wide ranging effects, apparently only being interested in their specialism and not being thoughtful about other impacts - downward discrimination as explained by C&E?)
	
intesnity of risk - ecological calamity, population eplosion, collapse of global economic exhange
Beck - glovalise risks do not discriminate 
man risks are still differntially distributed between privileged and underpriviledged eg nutrition and susceptibility to illness. 

disembeddin gmechanisms take thinkgs out of the hands of any specific individuals or groups [activisim, the feeling of having to do something are probably attempts to gain some kind of local control]
the more mechanisms are of global scope, the more this tes to be so. This can provide high levels of secuity, when the mechanisms function correctly but upset many people when they fail. However, no longer under local control, cannot be refocussed quickly to meet unexpected. 

p127 raises ‘numbing feeling almost one of boredom’ that lists like this induce, as risk awareness is so widespread.
p128 because of the intractability of problems, becomes part of the background noise ref 76

p128  within spheres of modern institutions risks also exist as closed institutionalised arenas of action. Risks created by normatively snctioned forms of activity. All business firms operate in an environment in which each has to outguess others in order to maximise economic returns. Difficulties in anticipating extraneous events - tech innovations are part of the nature of markets. 

p130 risky activities typicaly carried out under auspices of religion or magic. Variable how far trust this. Religion and magic often provided a way of sealing over the uncertainties entailed in risky endeavours, thus translating the experience of risk into feelings of relative security.  [this is not the same as not understanding the mechanisms of something and explaining it as “magic” but using it in a protective sense]
In a predominantly secular milieu, there are ways of trying to tranmute risk into providential fortuna, but they remain half hearted superstitions rather than truly effective psychological supports. charms or rituals to influence outcomes, but may be scorned if make practices too public.   

widespread lay knowledge of modern risk environments leads to “public relations” projblems faced by those who seek to sustain lay trust in expert systems. The faith that supports trust in expert systes involves a blocking off of the ignorance of the lay person when faced with the claims of expertise; but realisation of the areas of ignorance which confront the experts themselves as individual practitioners and in terms of overall fields of knowledge, may weake or undermine that faith on the part of the lay individuals. 

p131
inevitability of living with dangers which are remote from the control of individuals and of large orgs which are high intensity and life threatening. These are not risks that anyone chooses to run - Beck’s terms’ no ‘others’ who could be held responsible, attacked or blamed. This reinforces the sense of foreboding that many have noted as a characteristic of the current age. ref 78 punctuated differently to aid my understanding. 

p137
radical engagement = practical contestation towards perceived sources of danger. Those taking this stance hold that we can ad should mobilise either to reduce impact or to transcent them. Optimistic but bound up with contestory action rather than a faith in rational analysis and discussion. It’s prime vehicle is the social movement. 
[I wonder if this is always the case - some activists are good at rational analysis and discussion, rather than simple resistance - e.g. the AIDS activists, some patient groups etc though not necessarily antiMMR/vac]

p139
image of the juggernaut - runaway engine of enormous power, which collectivly as human beings we can drive to some extent but which also trheatens to rush out of our control and redner itself assunder. The juggernaut crushes those who resist it and while it sometimes seems to have a steady path, therea re times when it veers away erratically in directions we cannot foresee. Not wholly unpleasant or unrewarding, can be exhilarating and charged with hopeful anticipation. We shall neve be able to feel entirely secure, fraught with risks of high consequence.

p140
Familiarity
many aspects of life in local contexts continue to have a familiarity and ease to them, grounded in the day to day routines individuals follow. But the sense of the familiar is one often mediated by time-space distanciation. It does not derieve from the particularities of localised place. This experience is simultaneously distrubing and rewarding. Reassurance of the familiar, so important to a sense of ontological security, is coupled with the realiseation that what is comfortabe and nearby is actually an expression of distant events and was placed into the local env rathe rthan forming an organic development within it. The local shopping mall is a milieu in which a sense of ease and security is 
p141
cultivalted by the layout of the buildigns and the careful planning of public palces. All who shop there aware that most shops are chain, found in any city, innermable malls of similar design exist elsewhere. 
[does not mention using brand prodcuts, but I think that they are relevant to the feeling of security and familiarity]

p141
displacement - inserted into globalised cultuarl and information settings, which mean that familiarity and place are much less consistently connected than before. This is less estrangement from the local than interation within clobalised communities of shared experience. All familiar wth events, actions and visible appearance of physical settings thoughsands of miles away from where we happen to live. 
[think this would be relevant if there was an immigrant strand in this, or if there was a nonBritish event that affected decisions about control or distribution of chemical/brand in the UK]
p143
we live in a peopled world not merelyone of anonymous blank faces and the interpolation of abstract systems into our activites is intrinsic to bringing this about. 

in relations of intimacy of the modern type, turst is always ambivalent, possibility of severance more or less ever presence. the demand of opening oneself up to the other which personal trust relations now presume, the injunction to hide nothing from the other mix reassurance and deep anxiety. Personal trust demands a 
p144
level of self understanding and self expressing which must itself be a sourc eof psychologial tension. Mutuall self revelation is combined with the need for reciprocity and support, yet the two are frequently incompatible. Need for trust in the other as the provider of care adn support - torment and frusttration interwoven. 

deskiling and eskiling in everyday life. 
do abstract systems colonise a prexisting life world, subordinating personal decisions to technical expertise? (Habermas)
No
Modern instituteions do not just implant themselves into a lifeword. 
Technical expertise is continuously reappropriated by lay agents as part of their routine dealings with abstract systems. Noone can become an expert in the sense of the possesion either of full expert knowledge or of the appropriate formal credentials in more than a few small secotrs of the immensely complicated knowldege systems which now exist. YEt no one can interact with abstract systems w/o mastering some of the rudiments of the principles up on which they are based. 

[formalisation of housework through the schooling and certifiying by organisations - raising to expert level as recognised by other studies? e.g. Queen Mary Home Economics]

p145
suppose that in contrast to pre-modern era, ful of mysteries, that today we live in a world where mystery has retreated and the way the world works can in principle be exhaustively known. Not true for either lay person or the expert. Things are specifically opaque in wa way that was not the case previously. Wonders how many people understand electricity and its supply?
techical knowledge in one shape or anotehre is reappropriated by lay persons and routinely applied in the course of their day to day activities. Economic factors may decide whether a person learns to fix their car engine, rewire the electrical system of the house or fix the roof, but so do the levels of trust than an individual vests in the particualr expert sstems and known experts involved. 

p146 lay person - all in respect of the vast majority of expert systems - must ride the juddernaut. The lack of control which many of us feel about som e fo the circumstances of our lives is real.

p147
for low probability, high consquence things like nuclear war, deep anxieties are calmed by the feeling “there’s nothing that I as an individual can do”. Business as usaul is a prime element in the stabilising of trust and securty. 
Some risks intrude right into the core of day to day activities - Pollution damage affecting health of people, anything that produces toxic contents in food aor affects nutritional properties.  

p148
incoming expert information is often fragmentary or inconsistent, as is the recycled knowledge which colleagues friends and intimates pass on to one another.

p152
neither design faults nor operator failure are the most important elements producing the erratic character of modernity. The two most significant influences are unintended consequences and the reflexivity or circularity of social knowlede. 
p15
Design faulst and operater failure fall within the category of unintended consquences, but the category includes much more. No matter how well as system is designed and no matter how efficient the operators, the conseuqences of introduction and funciotnin in the contexts of the operation of other systems and human activity n general cannot be wholly predicted. Complextity that make up world society. 
Social world cannot form stalbe environment in terms of th einput of new knowledge about character adn functioing. New knowldege does not simpley render the social world more transparent but alters is nature, causes it to spin off in novel directions. 

p155
Utopian thinking is useless ad possibly extremely dangerous... oral conviction pursued without reference to the strategic implications of action may provide the psychological comfort which omes from the sense of wortht that radiacal engagement can confer. But it can lead to perverse outcomes if not tempered by the realisation that, with high consequence risks, the minimising of danger  must be the overriding goal. 
[how does this fit with my work? The dangers of poor hygenie in the home are perhaps offset with the availability of effective pharmaceuticals, but this was not always the case, in the 1930s to the 1960s infections could be very serious. Using chemicals to cleanse the home gives obvious local benefits in terms of improved health, although later it became apparent that there were perhaps downsides to using fossil fuels as feedstock, or that certain chemicals were not safe in some circumstances. The use of chemicals in the garden are less life or death, they are more about pleasure generally as very few people are only dependant on their gardens for subsistence. However, one’s own grden is where a person can try to act out an utopia - whether that is weed and pest free through the application of chemicals or one where plants coexist and chemicals are not applied]

p156
“life politics (self actualisation fundamental to self identity)) refers to radical engagements which seek to further the possibilities of a fulfilling and satisfying life for all, and in respect to which there are no ‘others’. A version fo the old distinction between ‘freedom from’ and ‘freedom to’ but freedom to has to be develoed in the light of a framework of utopian realism.

emancipatory (justice, equality) and life politics are are opposite ends of an axis - feminist movemnet has pioneered attemps to connect these two concerns.  

p157
Theordore Roszak says 
“both persona nd planet are threatened by the same enemy - the bigness of things.” ref 88
Giddens says that this is wrong althogh he aggrees with Roszak saying that “we live in a time when the very private experience of having a personal identity to discover a persoanl destiny to fulfil has become a subversive political force of major proportions.”

Bigness is not in itself either an enemy of the person or a phonomenon to be overcome. It is the coordination of individual benefit and planetary organisation that has to be te focus of concrn. Global connections of many kinds are the very condition of forms of individual self actualisation, including those that act to minimise high consequence risks. 


                                            free speech / democratic movements
                                                                 |
                                                                 |
         labour movements   ——————|——————  Peace movements
                                                                  |
                                                                  |
                                                   ecological movements
                                                    (counterculture)
                                                    
               labour and free speech /democartic movements are old. the others are newer, though the newness can be exaggerated. PAcificst movement snormally influecned by relidious vales date to early origins of industrialsed war. 
               the created environment is the site of struggle for ecological movements. Earliest tneded to be strongly influenced by romanticism, sought o counter impace of modern industry on traditional modes of production and on the landscape. Often aligned with workers movements but the separation of the two now relects hieghtened awareness of high consquence risks which industrial developmnt brings. Ecological concernd do not derive solely from high consequence risks, focus on other aspects of the created env. 
               
               




	