collecting chemicals

Definition and differences between chemical and chemistry
When thinking about chemicals in museums and trying to find academic writing on the subject, I have been confronted with a mismatch between my expectations and the results. This is because museums tend not to present chemicals, they present chemistry as an industrial pursuit or academic practice, they present chemists as causers and saviours of environmental disasters, they present chemical dyes and pharmaceuticals as world-changing innovations. Where I wanted to find chemicals that were used in British homes, I found an extremely limited selection of laundry detergents.  A paltry selection of Rinso and soaps stood in for the entire spectrum of household cleaning in small local and large national museums. Was this really all that could be said for chemicals in the home? Was this in fact all that needed to be said? 

More specialised museums were also mysteriously deficient. Trips to the museum of brands displayed a remarkably similar selection of soaps, although bottles of bleach, window cleaner and scouring powder were displayed to demonstrate changes in packaging technologies. This visual approach to technological changes was not supported by interpretation, but provided stimulus, as the rest of the room set style displays did, for nostalgic reminiscence. Eavesdropping on visitor conversations did not reveal spontaneous comments about usability, or sensory experiences associated with the product, but much more tangential discussions of the state of things generally. Perhaps chemicals do not mean much to their users. 

Even so, the 

chemicals vs instruments
used up vs attractive brass and glass
dangerous vs unfathomably impressive
must be used with other things vs is seen as the main object

collecting displaying

Audience? 
Nostalgia - or so few practiced it i t is not seen relevant? 
meanings

what forms do chemicals in museums take?


Chemicals can be part of social history collections, science or industrial collections, meaning they, as many other objects can, can tell different stories as necessary. 

This means I should look beyond the Science Museum for how museums display chemicals, as the science museum really does seem to be concerned with Chemistry rather than chemicals. 



Glasgow - chemicals are part of the story about what happened to glasgow's industry - workers experiences eg. "danger - work can damage your health"
People's Story -  - 19th and 20th C displays follow themes of housing, health and hygiene, friendly societies, leisure, religion and culture. 


In ICON's "caring for" series
Plastic materials - packaging is not mentioned, indicating how this does not feature as an important collections area, that conservators might be asked for advice on. 