Questions / comments from Science Museum audience

Contextualisation - 
	cultural significance of herbicides 	
					Agent Orange was in the newspapers a lot in the 1970s
	other agrochemicals in the news
					e.g. Sheep dip
	gardening
					growth of the suburbs, manuals for professional gardeners, what were people doing
					

How did the words used police people's compartmentalisation of chemicals? 
	e.g. defoliant, more worrying than herbicide

How did paraquat escape the poisons regulations? 
	e.g. bottles
	think agrochemicals weren't subject to quite the same as domestic?
	
Users
	sales figures
	oral histories, esp allotment socs
	coroners reports for suicides?
				how does this fit with the end of coal gas and barbiturates? 				

Bottles
	screw tops/ corks? 
	process of reuse/ recycling different, lots of bottles around and all useful 
	
People probably would have tried to store left over granules/ dilute solution. 

What other gardening chemicals came as granules? Was paraquat setting or following a trend? Why did they choose granules? 
	
Sodium chlorate 
	paraquat replacing this, but what about the terrorism aspect? 
	It's not something that I found was particularly worrisome, I expected it to be but it hasn't really come up as much as I expected to with respect to the  IRA or other groups. Mainly school children. 
	
Liz - mentioning allotment societies, agricultural users, small holdings - how did the chemical company set the scale of use 
also useful point about disciplining - how did the company and the media discipline incorrect uses, or try to shape the correct users? Negative portrayal of misusers as discipline, modelling poor user. 

Peter
Why did ICI/ Plant Protection make a paraquat herbicide for amateur gardeners? 

Interesting because it illuminates ICI as a company - this was one of the few places that they had a direct link with consumers. Was not usually this involved with the public, beyond promoting chemical industry more generally. ICI were one of the most, if not the most, prominent companies in the UK, definitely chemical companies. There were an establishment, like the BBC or London Transport, rather than a commercial company. Working for ICI was like being a civil servant. 

There had been danger that ICI would be nationalised under Labour government. 

Image of chemicals/ chemical industry - Merchants of Death - explosives - Nobel. 

Had a quick look at the New Scientist (informed opinion, where msm journalists might be getting their info from) and they were not linking paraquat to Agent Orange until really quite late 1973, mostly in the 1980s. 

Should look further into New Scientists coverage of paraquat. Think the Times at least depended on Nature for its coverage of science topics. New Scientist definitely read by school children and students, interested public, not so much professionals. Didn't cover much chemistry, though were always strong on the environment. Scientific American was very much on scientific developments, New Scientist really wasn't  - much more on science in society?

Gardening - not so sure about growth of suburbia, but Peter suggests that enthusiasm was waning for labour, wanting to spend more leisurely time in the garden, this was the age of the hover mower being introduced. Time poor, look at the broader context of chemicals used in the garden. 

When I asked why there seemed to be an assumption that there was a poor public image of chemistry Peter cited recruitment to chemistry courses, what happens after those courses (becoming teacher, academic rather than entering company) also surveys of public show negative/ hostile attitudes although chemistry and chemicals get different result as do chemists, as people tend to think of pharmacists rather than chemists. 

2 ways advert - smoking a pipe, wouldn't he have got chemicals on his hands, then his pipe stem? Weedol is so clean and convenient to use that this is not a problem. Ultimate symbol of leisure. 







