Liverpool Museum

Couldn’t find anything on branded consumer chemicals, or anything domestic/hobby oriented other than dolls and mechano. Maybe they feel that they would be stepping on the toes of other museums or establishments like Port Sunlight or Catalyst. Storage of chemicals is mentioned in fireman/recovery officer when he talks about the fires that can happen at the docks. No companies or the destinations of the chemicals are mentioned. 

I’d’ have thought there might be more on domesticity, as there was an interesting section on the poverty and density of houses squashed into proximity with wealth, servants and squalor are mentioned, as is a laundry dolly/ device but not how the sdqualour was counteracted. Lots of health htanks to the school of tropical medicine and legacy of the repal of contagious diseases re prostitutes act - various repetitions of smallpox models, gonorreal infetions of the eye, syphilis. However, no patent meds etc, nothing on modern biotech industry that I could see. 

One photo of a chemist shopfront selling photographic supplies and pure drugs. Chubbs?

Cafe really dingy, table veneeer chipped, counter very dark, cakes not made on site. coffee ok, wrong change. Looking very worn and scuffed in places. The What’s On electonic sighnage was blurry. Saw Graham.

No maps other than on walls, selling a guide for a pound. Did not actually seem to want to sell it to me though. Where have I seen this before?! Overwhelming visitor demand at MOSI for site maps meant that they were reintroduced for free. Having said taht, I think the pas weren’t very good, I managed to miss a gallery completely as the museum seems to be strangely divided in half by education /staff/ conference areas. 

Was surprised at the number of weird dead ends, dead or slack spaces, and more could be made of the picture windows and balconies (i.e. not storing redundant things like stair rails there in sight of visitors). Fire alarm revealed very rough stairwells, which could do with better direction to get people out, also a box was stored on one of the landings, which was inappropriate in a fire exit.

Loved the liver bird case with the birds talking about themselves.Lots of cases in partial or complete darkeness, some object labels strangely positioned and in dark places. Impressesive objects though a lot of repetition with certain sweets products and also the hooks for handling cargo. 

Several interactives out of order, tatty signs, actually quite a lot of tatty temporary signs, plus the ocasional temporary or correction label which were usually laminated. Think there was a childrens’ trail, they were pretty well catered for with lots of things that they could do, plus some almost hidden displays that only they could see at sort of pushhair level. 