One &  All Gardening 1913

popular annual  for amatuers and all garden lovers

inside cover - full page ad for pears soap
p1 1/4 pg ad for Dr J Collis Browne;s Chlorodyne - reliable family medicine
p5 1/5pg ag for Smith’s Perfect weedkiller liquid and patent powder. First evver mande and first ever since. Sufficent liquid of powder to make 100 galons, 6/6 carr. paid. Write to Mark SMith, Ltd. Louth Lincolnshire.
p7 1/4pg Thomas & Co’s Horticultural fertilsiers & anitpests
Fertilium (the most concnetraated fert on the market) 
sweet pea fertiliser
garden fert for roses & c
 ditto for vegettables
 Arborite for destroying Wieworm &c. 
 Post orders and enq to Thoma & Co. Ltd Ceres Works Liverpool Agents Watnted
 p13 1/4pg ad Death to 5000 deep rooted weeds such as docks, thistles and dandelions on lawns and fields or among growing cops without injury to the surrounding grass or crops by the use of KILM weed eradicator A single stab does it! The work of days of handweeding compressed into half and hour. Ask your seedsman to get you one on approval. Boundary Chem. Co. Ld. C anmer St Liverpool. First cost only 2/6 recharders 6d each. 
 
 p17 1/2 pg ad for Mfcrs Corry & Co Ltd London sold by all nurserymen and seedsman
 Niquas - cheapest insecticide of the day (non-poisonous) concentrated extract of Quassia
 Lethorion improved metal cones for evaporating in greenhouses to destroy insect pests.
 Fowlers lawn sand - destroy daises and other weeds a tthe same ime stimulate growth of grass. Sales are largely increasing. 
 Lists other destroyers - Ewings mildew destroyer, tobacco powder, tobacco juice, nicotine soap, Supazall Fumigating computns, extract of uassia, etc etc. [No chemical names - these seem to be all plant based?]
 
 p18  1/4pg ad Little;s Weed destroyer (poisonous)  Little’s fruit tree spraying fluid. Pesticide, Antipes.   of all nurserymen, seedsmen, floriss &c. Morris, Little & SOn Doncaster. 
 
 p21 1/5 pgad Haward’s Eureka Weed Killer saves weary weeding
 eureka lawn sand
 eurekatine the perfect fumigant. 
 Tomlinson & Hayward ltd Lincln
 
 p24 1/4pg ad “Acme” weed killer for destroying weeds moss adn c... used in the crystal palac groundsd, RHS gardes, Kew &C. 
 Tins free. No return of empties. 
 Fumerite to be duge into soil
 Arsenate of lead past
 Acme Chemical Co Ltd, Tonbridge Kent and Sriver ST Colton Lancs. 
 
 p25 1/8pg 
 The bes that money can buy. Borwick’s Baking Powder [in approximation of cobb loaf outline?]
 
 p27
 1/4pg
 ads for spraying syringes - the Arnold and the peeles. to be had of all ironmongers sores an seedmens. G&W Purser Ld Haon Garden 
 
 no mention of chems other than limes added to clay soils in text. 
 
 p119 
 full page ad
Gardeners one and all agree that their reates help in the garden and greenhouse are the ABOL non-poisonouse insectidies. The sure kill for garden and gh pests and mildew. USed at royal gardens key and at white city gardens. [images of jug of abol]
And the abol patent syringe spec. recommende by the national rose society. 

p123
full page ad 
If you have a home and wish it well read Popular Science Siftings - food, health, sociology, invention, art, literature
exposes quacks and other fruads. new feature gives particulars concerning propreiary aricles (foods bev, med) and for this reason alone it should be purchased weekly by you. has been a phonomenal success for over 20 year.  



1914

p9
1/4pg - With’s univeral manure as cheap as stable manure. 56lb bag goes further than a cartload of stable manure. Saves all carting wheeling labour and unpleasantness. the cheapes chemical manure on the market. 
p20 - Littles as beofe, Smiths, as before,
p21 Eureka as before
p24 Corry and Acme as before
p32 G&W purser ltd as before

p117 full page ad for Abol, almost as before. with added “many cold asilve and bronze medals and awards
Abol wormkiller - non-poisonous, abol shading for greenhouses and conservatories


1915
p4   Corry (1/2pg)  and Acme 1/4pg

p18 G&W Purer - delivery hose and gardne hose, The Arnold spraying syring.e
Smiths perfect weedkiler

p44  disease and insect pest
 1oz sulphide of potassium (liver of sulphyr) to 3 gallons water
 spray young leaves at intervals of10 days with Bordeaux mixture until winter and again ithe spring whn growth starts. 
 
 insect pest - catch in sugar water traps
 
 p81
 full page Abol ad
 inc this time plant food 0 a realy wonderful all round fertilister highly benefical to all plant sand veg. highly concnetrated more efficacious aand economical than any other. 
 p86 full yage popular sicnece siftyings
 p87  1/8 pg Eureka as before
 
 
 
 
 Amateur Gardening annual and year book     1912
 
 p1 1/2 page ad for Ganary Guano, split with “Gardo” “non poisonous and does not affect he skin or burn the lcothes of the operator. It is soluble in cold water and if used according ot insturctions does not discoulr or leavy any visible film on foliage or flours. 
 
 sold by all seedsmen, urserymen etc. pahplet fibing full particulars on CG and 33 other fertilisers sent post free 
 The Chemical Union Ltd. Ipswich
 
 p1 1/2pg ad GH Richards Borough High St London Mfcr and Patnetee. Trade only supplied. [creating demand] 
 no info on any of the contents of the products. 
 
 p3 1/8pg  Hy Richardson & Compy Skeldergate Bridge York.
 artifical fertilisers
 ... it has no offensive smell. 
 also ... sulphare and nitrate of potash, sulph of ammonia, nitrate of soda also the new feriliser nitrate of lime. 
 
 p25
 1/2pg Clays - write fo rlist of manures, chemical sand sundries. Every tin bag and seal bears lis trade mark - the only guarantee of genuiness. 
 
 p56 1/4 pg advers for sole Mfrs Wm cooper & Nephews Berkhampsted
 Apterite
 weedicid
 coopers fungicide - an imporved brodeaux mixture for potatoes and other funous disease. v1 fluid, v2 fluid, v2K fluid for mildew. Agents everywhere. 
 
[other htna bordeaux mix, no indication of what chem]

p156 
1/2 page of useful hints
spirts of salt to clean glas. 
scum on ponds - half strenth bordezu mixture. 
waterproof garden neting - sugar of lead and powdered alum
sofening water - soda or lime
flower gum - useful for dropping into the cnetre of cut flowers that quickly shed their petals - shellac in spirts of wine or meth spirits. 
gishurstine for waterpoofig boots - tallow and resin melted
shadings - newly slaked lime, whiting and skim milk. 
labels - slips of sinz written up on with bichloirde of platinum have long been in use, not esaily superseded. preacitcally everlating. nitronuriate of platinnum for writin gon szinc.

1/4 pg Boundary chemical co, cranmer st liverpool
our reliable garden helps mean weedless lawns weedless walks healthy plants
climax lawn sand. 
climax weed killer 
weedite - for walks applied in powder form durin showery weather
alphol soil insectiide and fert. 
crude alphol for vacant land only. 

p157
insecticides and fungicides (article, namechecking brands as well as some recipes to mix yourself) acouple of paragraphs from the ufll page 
“There is no lack of preoparations nowadays for coping with pests of disease. Very many excellent insecticides and funcigides are now on the marke which being prearaed by skilled chemis are not only more efficacious in action byt also ready for use at a monets notice. THere is no need to waste precious hours or labour in making home-made mixtures and in teh meantime allow foes to go on damaging crops. A reference ot the ads in theis Anaul will show the reader many differen kinds one or more of which he should make it his business ot procure and stock in readiness for use. 
..urgent importance of promptly applying remedies directly the ofes are seen. Do not wait until our trees area swarming... Every minute every hour and every day the foes are left feasing on the foliaage they are ruining the beasuty and ituoliy of your plans and then the remedies are too lade to repair the mischief done. It is for this reason tha we urge readers to always keep insecticides and funcides in stodk so that they can be used immediately the enemy or enemies are discovered.”

p158-159 winter spraying - home made spray fluids
caustic soda

soft soap, paraffin

quicklime 0 let it slake graudally, add salt and water, strain. 
lime, cuasic soda, sulphur. 
copprer uslphate and water. 

turpentine to kill wasps

p161 − 162 article on manures
doesnot brand check, other than hop manure
gives directions for creaing liquid manures from animal manures, what not to apply with what (eg do not mix nitrate o soda with superphosphate of lime, apply separatnly. do not mis sulphat eof ammonia with basic slag, appl spearately. ) 


p163 full page ad

Robinson’s artificial manures, insecticides syringes and spraying machines

Today , tomorrow anytime Rboinson’s Gardenalities can be relied up on o be one of the unwavering standard of quality and efficacy. From beginning to ent eh mfcr of all Robinsons Fertilizers, insecticides lawn sand etc is conducted under the strick supervision of expert chemist, and finally sampled tested and analsyed before distribution. 

carmona munure - pureset and most natural of chemical manures. ...
clifts manurial insecticide
robinsons pine spray - absolutely uninjurious to even he tenderest foliage under glass. non poisons wash w pleasnat aroma. 



 