Amateur gardening
5th May 1934
p19 Luda weedkiller
Kill weeds safely! Harmless to animals (picture of two dogs)
kill weeds with Luda. It contains no poison so is absolutely harmless to animal life. Its effect on weeds and moss is swift and permanent - destroying from tehe very roots. Luda the safe weed killer
if any difficulty in obtaining write:
Tomlinson and Haward Ltd Newland Lincoln

p24 Eureka
it's easier, quicker, with Eureka weed killer
Eureka weed killer is the easiest and most effective method of killing weeds. Saves hours of backache and discouraging toil - and eradicates deep-rooted as well as surface weeds. Economical to use a 3/- tin is sufficient for 100 square yards. Buy a tin today of all agents, also in liquid form. Write for Chemistry in the Garden free on application to Dept A Tomlinson and Hayward Newland Lincoln. 

Watson's lawn sand - advert says
The Pioneer Lawn sand
First marketed in 1868. Vastly improved since. 

Amateur gardening 12 May 1934
p45 New Radio-Active plant-graowing discovery 
Radioliser plant energiser
dry powder possessing radioactive properties. 
clean to handle, no smell, a point which lady gardeners esp will appreciate
says has all three types of radioactivity 
also radioiser for lawns too! 
Radioliser, 300 Adelphi Salford Manchester

(radioliser also has advert showing woman using the product. though most are men looking at the lawn)

lxxi 19th May 1934
Corry & Co
Weed-death
non-poisonous powder (picture of skull)
weed killer

26th May p1
Small ad
Kill your weeds for a whole year with one dressing of Hookstile non poisonous weed-killer. For paths, drives hard tennis courts etc. The most powerful on the market. alb dissolved in cold water to make a solution for 30 to 40 sq yd 6/6 carr. paid to station in England and Wails
testimonial
HJW esq of Betchworth Surry writes "I am sending a repeat of my last order for Hookstile Special weed-killer. It is the finites preparation I have ever used during many years gardening and is all that you claim for it. Applying it in aprili the weeds soon disappeared and I had no occasion to do any path weeding during the remainder of th year - Hookstile Minerals (agric) ltd. Farnham Surrey. 

xvii
Bentley's Mortweed
A scientific triumph the new non-poisonous powder weedkiller
the content of one tin when dissolved in 50 gallons of water will dress 200 sq yards, kill all weeds and sterilise the ground for 6 months. 1 tin 5/6, 4 tins 21 8 tins 40/- 12 tins 58/- Tins free and non-returnable carriage paid
Joseph Bentley Ltd Barrow-on-Humber

26th May 
McDougall's perfect safety weedkiller
demand a safe product that has withstood the test of Time.. that costs from 1/6 upwards.. that banishes weeds from paths and drives That's McDougalls

2nd June 1934 p120
cleaning dirty glass
recommend hydrofluoric acid for cleaning dirty glass - most effective, method was to apply it very diluted with a half used paint brush and washed with just ordinary water afterwards? I might also add that slight pressure should be used in v gad cases. The only place the acid is obtainable (in this district is Timothy White's T.W.N.

2nd June p126
The weed problem 
an ever pressing task
describes what hoeing actually does, suggests digging in weeds. 
one paragraph of the page is devoted to chemical control
Druing recent yrs successful experiments have been made for destroying certain field weeds but this method would hardly be practical for the gardener, escpet on paths, drives and lawns.. Solutions of copper sulphate, sulphate of iron or of ammonia have proved the most generally useful and the last named is well known as the chief ingredient of lawn sand. 
offers common salt (sodium chloride) and says that sodium chlorate is being experimented with 
weeding must be done regularly, not spasmodically

9th June 1934
xx
Don't stoop to weed! (image of man stooping before border, with a barrow)
Give up troublesome and expensive hand weeding to-day! Clear weeds from paths and hard courts without damage to the surface, Sofnol non-poisonous weedkiller is as effective as arsenic yet absolutely safe. Simply dissolve at the rate of 1 1/4 oz per gallon in cold water and apply to paths and hard courts with an ordinary watering can. Sofnol weedkiller does not merely scorch the tops but acts on the roots and in a few days kills the whole plant. Trial tin with full directions 1/-
Sofnol weedkiller non poisonous soluble
1 lb makes 12 1/2 gallons enough to treat 50 square yards
of all nursery men, ironmongers etc. Write for leaflet to Sofnol, Ltd Greenwich SE10
(image of man in a hat, smoking a pipe, hand in pocket, watering on weed killer from a watering can)

p145 report on sundries present at Chelsea flower show - lots of chemical companies and their products inc Pan Britannica Ltd, ICI brought samples of turf as well, Sofnol, Corry and Co, Electical Chemical Processes ltd made feature of their colloidal copper and sulphur sprays. 

23rd  June 1934
p1 Abol weed killer
weedy paths
mossy and weedy garden paths and walks can be cleared without restarting to the costly and bachaching hand method, by using Abol non-arsenical [weed] killer. It is entirely free from arsenic and can be used where there are domestic animals. Simply mix with water at the rate of 1 gallon to 25. 
write for descriptive folder, of nurserymen seedsmen ironmongers etc. Sol proprietors and manufacturers Abol Ltd Beltring Paddock Wood Kent
Safe to use anywhere. 

