British Agrochemicals Directory 
1975
foster responsible and safe manufacture and use of agrochemicals with due regard for the interest of community and environment, to place views of industry before Govt, Govt depts and others, to ensure that the industry is presented fairly and positively at all times.

members abide by code of practice:
label according to MAFF
promote products in fair and reputable manner, substantiated
contain products in suitable packages
transport safely
compentent
production in suitable premises and minimise env contamination
enforce safety precautions are enforced esp. in manufacturing process 

works with PSPS and ACAS, also Transport Emergency cards in vehicles carrying agricultural chems. 
disseminate info about safe use, produce posters
participates with govt bodies, research orbs, the NFU and agricultural merchants BASAM, British Crop Protection Council.
p9
in touch with RSPB, British Beekeepers Assoc, Nature Conservancy Council, Institute of Terrestiral Ecology, British Trust for Ornithology. 

1974 survey shows total sales of agrochemicals at home and abroad (excluding inter company sales) was nearly £128 million. 
home sales (not going to copy out the abroad)
37, 194, 337  Weedkillers tops this list 
6, 793, 940  insecticides
7, 551, 583 fungicides
2, 121,901 seed tmts
2, 727, 545 all other ag and hort pesticides

p10
home sales of
1, 343, 124 garden weedkillers and growth hormones
1, 133, 248 weedkiller/fertiliser mixture
1, 878, 984 household garden insecticides inc slug killer
455, 088     garden fungicides
292, 860    misc garden pesticides
total 5, 103, 304  (compared to export of same 291,634)


in 1957 Trade Assocn in the UK representing pesticide mfcrs, importers, and servicing cos formally agreed with the govt they would not market new pesticides for any used (inc home gardens) unless formulation had been cleared for safety by the govt and appropriate precautions agreed. This is the basis of th ePSPS, administer by the MAFF and a condition of membership of the BAA to comply with the provisions of this scheme. 

p11
any new pesticide or recommend a new use for an existing one =
notify Min Ag, provide data to enable minister to decide whether the product can be used safety. 
data required= properties, persistence, breakdown products, mode of action, toxicity to mammals, inc if possible man, likely effects on wildlife - birds, fish and bees. What used for, how to be used, what risks might arise and provide methods of analysis and sometimes details of proposed overseas uses. 
sub-committee of scientific secretariat recommends precautions taken when using the products, which crops used on, interval between tmt and harvest. 

PSPS only relates to safety, not efficacy. 
Efficacy is covered by ACAS, but need PSPS approval before proceeding. When ACAS is approved, the product can display the special A mark. This enables users to select and adverse to recommend, effect and appropriate crop protection chems and to discourage the use of unsatisfactory products. 

p12
relevant legislation 
The Agriculture (poisonous substances) Regulations 1975
The Agriculture (safety, health and welfare provisions) Act 1956 and Regulations
The deposit of poisonous waste act 1972 and regulations
the hydrogen cyanide (fumigation) act 1937 and regulations
the farm and garden chemicals act 1967 and regulations
the Pharmacy and poisons act 1933 and the Poisons Rules
the food and drugs act 1955 and regulations
the protection of animals act 1911 to 1927
the protections of birds act 1954 to 1967
the animal (cruel poisons) act 1962 and regulations
the medicines act 1968 and regulation 
the air navigation order 1972

p46
Atlacide - different preparations
Atlacide - sodium chlorate plus fire depressant as a liquid concentrate made by Chipman Ltd
Atlacide - sodium chlorate plus fire depressant as a soluble powder made by Chipman Ltd and ICI Plant Protection 
p47
Atlacide Extra - sodium chlorate plus fire depressant as a dusting powder made by Chipman

p49
Boots sodium chlorate - in a crystallised form for garden use. 
p50
Bugges sodium chlorate - soluble powder made by Bugges insecticides
p60
Liquisafened chlorate - formulated as a suspension for garden use made by Pan Britannica Industries. 
p61
longmates sodium chlorate - granules EC Longmates ltd (ag?)
p62
nantcol liquid weedkiller s- sodium chlorate liquid  - synchemicals ltc
p66
sodium chlorate by murphy chemical ltd - powder
sodium chlorate by the craven chemical co - formulated as coarse powder
sodium chlorate with fire depressant - powder for garden use ICI Plant Protection
p68
syrate - sodium chlorate liquid formulation Synchemicals. 

----------

1978 Directory of Garden Chemicals
3rd edition
British Agrochemicals assocn 
p3
find way through 200 or so garden chemicals now available
explains pesticide as generic term for any chemical used to kill control or diminish pests diseases and weeds that threaten man, his crops, his domestic animals or his environment 

members of association not only mfc garden chems so garden chemicals benefit form the expertise built up in producing agrochemicals for commercial use. 
special garden products committee looks after rht garden chemicsa sector. 
active ingredients the same but those intended for gardeners are often specially formulated and paced so that amateurs can use them safely and effectively. Agchem for professional users should not be used by gardeners. 

PSPS
developed and tested many yrs by mfcrs but before they are marketed they are cleared by the PSPS. ensures no product is recommended util extensive safety studies have been studied and accept by the Advisory committee on pesticides. no industry reps on this committee and composed of independent scientists and officials chosen for their expert k of pesticides. 

p4 
PSPS lays down precautions must be taken for safe use of garden or farm chem, the plants it can be used on, the application rates, and elapsed time between app and harvest. this info must appear on labels and leaflets. 

goes onto define methods insecticides, fungicides and herbicides
p5 - act though the leaves, or through the roots, or both
selective or non selective/total

safe and effective use of garden chems
right formulation of right chem at the right time
read and obey carefully and thoroughly 

points on usage - read and follow directions on label
use recommended dosage
only if there is a recommendation to mix chemicals do so
wash out mixing vessel and spray before and after each usage
aerosols - follow directions, too close or too heavy can damage plants. visible wetting of foliage is not desirable or necessary
do not spray in bright sunshine = may damage plants
with edible crops it is important to adhere to the interval between spraying and harvesting

p6
timing  - important as can effect efficacy 
lawn weedkillesr apply during good growing conditions
follow directions - some active agains established weeds, others only kill newly germinated seedlings
first sign of insect attack
foliage fungicides will not eradicate established infections

storage - out of reach of children or pets, in frost-free conditions
as with other dom chem, not near food
weedkillers must not be kept in green houses because of the risk of plant damage by spillage or by fumigant action. 

disposal of surplus dilute spray - they quickly deteriorate, do not store. empty into outside sink drain, into the WC or onto the soil in premises not on main drainage disposal on soil is preferable

unwanted garden chems - any which have lost their labels or label illegible should be thrown away. 
solid pesticides left in their containers with lid firmly closed and place din the dustbin. liquid products as above. and containers place din duetbin. Further infer available in Dept of Env Report not he disposal of awkward and household wastes 1975

list here is much shorter (obvs)
p15
sodium chlorate - boots
sodium chlorate plus fire depressant - ICI sodium chlorate, murphy sodium chlorate

ferrous sulphate (not sulphate of ammonia) is what is listed for the herb/fert mixture - velvas, lawn sand. 

--------
sixth edition 1981 
gets additional warning on metaldehyde slug pellets looking like pellet typed dog food, dangerous. labels warn that the product should be kept away from pets, applies to both storage and use. scatter, not heap.
dog repellent incorporated after 1st August 1981
packaging more difficult for pets to get pellets out
warning phrases strengthened and given more prominence. some dogs will eat anything. follow common sense. (p6-7)
also additional on 2,4,5-T
alarmed by publicity - reassurance in govt announcement 17th Dec 1980 that 2,4,5-T when used by gardeners as recommended was considered safe. 

some changes in the list of members supplying garden chemicals - 
Chipman and Agrichem added
uniroyal ltd gone
ICI plant protection changed to ICI garden products

addition to sodium chlorate - 
atlacide extra dusting powder (contains atrazine and fire depressant) Chipman Ltd


-----------
9th edition 
1984
new symbols on labels - EEC law 
only two will be found on any garden chemical - the St Andrews cross signifying irritant or in very few cases harmful (not skull /toxic)
products containing sodium chlorate will carry the oxidising symbol. (not highly flammable or explosive)

rest is the same but the 2,4,5-T notification has gone
p11 new section on pesticides nd wildlife
refrain from using pesticides until positively identified the problem. 
adhere exactly to mfcrs instructions cannot be too strongly emphasised. 
choose time to spray when few beneficial insects are on the wing (echoes best time to spray info)
avoid spraying open flowers as they will be viised by pollinators
reptiles and amphibs are gardeners friends, treat we respect, sensitive to pesticides. 

atlas agrochemicals new
crop safe gone
McKechnie Ltd/ COMAC agrochem Widens new
Temana (consumer products of Shell) gone
Wellcome gone
Synchemicals new

no change to previous suppliers of sodium chlorate or ferrous sulphate





