p283 Walter made a fuss about Margery [Fish, couple, We made a garden] putting eggshells on the compost heap. e thought it silly when lime could be bought for a few pence. 

mary tulloch - mother of author's friend, taken as example of normal average person

p287
garden notebook, covering 1934-1939 (ends in August before war declared)
cut out and pasted extracts from the weekly *Home Gardening* and annoyed
bursting at the seams
Home gardening guide to garden pest control
14 diff pests of roses, 
poison cupboard - tobacco powder, derris, soot water, paraffin, soil fumigant, soft soap wash, nicotine insecticide, quassia soution. Did not come in handy spray canisters, had to be measured out, dilted and squirted with a syringe. 
Weedkillers did not exist  (yes they did)
neither did proprietary granular or liquid fertilisers. 
soot later, liq manure, superpohospate sul potash
sul ammonia green sulphur

p288
in those days when men went to work and women stayed at home it was usual for wives rather than husbands to do most of the gardening. Typical owner gardener. 

p289
interesting that kept a garden book when plenty o published advice available. Little that she couldn't have found in the Complete Book of Gardening  written by curators of Botanic  Gardens Kew published by Ward Lock. Own notes expressed commitment and determination
(possibly price? imagine it wasn't a cheap book - might have been more attainable to get the paper) 

p295
literacy increasing pre WW2
by 1939 70% popn over 16yo read national daily newspaper and Sunday papers was 80%
Dail Telegraph to News of the World, Sunday People to the observer, and weekly and monthly mags all had regular columns on gardening so expertise was available to virtually all literate gardeners. 

Gardens looked inwards again as they had in medieval times, exclude a hostile world and give privacy from neighbours. 
p296
advice was practical 
WArd Lock's Complete Gardening 1966 
numerous photographs
mainly alphabetical plant list, also chapters on Garden Tools, basic operations, construction of features, designing and planning. 

p297
smog - 1952 
p299 finally gets round to talking about smog and gardens
HH Thomas editor of Popular Gardening and Good Gardening, in  his book Gardening in Towns  1936
on air pollution - an acid soil is unwelcome to most plants, one of the first things a town gardener must do... is to correct acidity. 
p300
dahlias apparently grow well in smoky districts, Today it is known that a certain amount of air pollen hops ward off blackspot and mildew, deters aphids, rust on hollyhocks also seen off by soot in the atmosphere. 

p312
Allan Patmore's Land and Leisure 1970
married men - i nterest in gardening starts between 23-30 o, occupied 7% of time, steadily rose to a peak of 20% of time in men 60+
Perhaps surprising, women spent less of their leisre time gardening, 3.5%  for married women between 23 and 30 rising to 10% time 60+

