Gardeners are asking

a slim volume produced by Plant Protection
with the profits going to the Red CrossAgriculture fund

qs asked and andwered at a series of meeting in support of the Dig for Victory movement

Ministry of Food announcements
foreword by Tom willimas MP - PS to the Mino fAg

cultivating and manuring
	- compost making preparation/ chemical [this is the first question in the book - did PP make a compost making chem?]  p3
	- lime  p3
	- nitrate of soda or "Nitro-chalk"  options given - inc branded p3 [did PP make Nitrochalk?]
	- formaldehyde for sterilising potting compost p4
	- naphthalene for carrot sets - does not say how to apply p6
	- derris for insect pests p7 
- on the subject of fertilisers

only says 'nitrogenous fertilisers' or 'complete fertilisers', does not further define light dressing

p7 is it true that tap water should not be used for watering plants? No. You could use tap water although rain water is preferable as regards temp. 

slug bait - Meta fuel p9
is derris harmful - only to fish and insects p9
how can I stop cats - with garden pepper dust or catapult  [why is garden pepper dust not just peppers?] p9
derris tastes unpleasant p9
soap and derris for blackfly (does not say why for soap - but suspect this is surfactant) p9
"good insecticide" p10
children should be encouraged to catch the white butterflies of the second brood.  p10

natphalene at 20z per sq yard for killing wireworms.  p10
or spread fairly thickly - 2 handfuls per sq yd and fork in well (soil fumigant) 

Bordeaux mixture p11 no instructions or detail about what it is

will certain sprays damage stirrup pump - advice to clean well after use p12

is there a way of ensuing greengage jam stays green (not brown) - make the jam in a copper /lined pan p13

incendiary bomb fell through shed and veg stored covered with fine grey powder. Will they be fit to eat. If you wash the veg very thoroughly they should be allr ight, but there is no experience to guide us on this point.  p14

p15 
August question - plot of land offered is rank with nettles and bindweed. If I does it with sodium chlorate now, how long must I wait before sowing? About six months.

p16
how long will a granular fertiliser keep in store? Gran fert will keep indefinitely in store if dry. 



Nowhere was it discussed obtaining chemicals, or how to store them safely. This all seems to be taken as known/given. There were refs to certain chems  potash being harder to obtain, but no others. 


