Garden weeds and their control 
1949
p56
chemicals such as salt have been used for 100s of years
only within past 60 years that sig advances
appeal - scientific, efficient, economical and laboursaving
contact
translocated
each subdivided into non selective and selective
p57
non selective weedkiller broadcast to control weeds in unimportant areas such as banking and ditch sides and to destroy unwanted vegetation or annuals on vacant ground which are going to set red

sulphuric acid and water solution - can be used as non-selective or selective. Almost every herbicide can be used selectively where its application can be confined to the foliage of the weed plant

sodium chlorate - [first chemical w subheading] most popular non selective wk in general use, highly effective wide range of weeds, non poisonous to livestock, pets and humans at strengths used in the garden
kills plant tissues in contact and is absorbed by roots
p58
partial sterilisation of the soil by destroying all plant life. 
depends on nature of soil how long theis lasts
neglected plots, preferably in early autumn, and clearing weeds in paths, drives, hard tennis courts and open spaces. Applied when plants are growing and plants shouls be allowed to die before removal. 
applied dry in powder or fine crystalline, allowing rain to dissolve. 
Much safer to apply in solon - more even distribution. 
5% soon for small weeds, 10% solution for deeper ones. 
lateral creep - leave margin of at least 6 inches. 
dry state  - highly inflammable. store in safe place

p59 
clothing wetted, wash out not allow to dry as friction, heat or lighted match. 
wear overalls and rubber boots, work away from wind. avoid walking through veg. 
keep dogs and poultry out of treated areas to reduce fisk of fur or fetters wetted with the solution becoming inflammable. 

Altacide - named as proprietary product with fire retardant. includes calcium chloride.
potassium chlorate dearer and therefore used less often. 

sodium arsenate. similar use circumstance. Arsenic accumulate in soil causee soil toxicity. 
outside the path, courtyard drive, little scope for arsenical weedkillers. Better to use the non-poisonous sodium chlorate. 

p141 tree stumps - holes bored, half fill with sodium chlorate or sodium arsenate then top up with water. Ammonium thiocyaniate in 10% soon will also work. 
p142 sodium chlorate soaked cotton wool fixed to cut crowns of brambles -  especially useful when bramble lodged in inaccessible place

p22 - the fundamental truth is that making a garden out of doors is largely a question of weed control. The time, effort and obey which must be spent annually on eliminating weeds 
p23 is always greater than that devloted to controlling plant disease and insect pests, and the losses caused by weeds are apt to be no greater than those caused by disease or insect. 
no estimate on what weeds cost gardeners. 
cost to farmers before 1914-1918 war was £16 500 000 per annum
for the gardener the losses are
aesthetic
lower yields
impaired plant performance and deterioration and loss

[details of how to use sodium chlorate in different situations] 
[nothing on where to get the chemicals, or how easy it might be to get them]
--------------

Weed control in farm and garden 
willis
1954

finishes with plea for good management rather than simply reliance on chemical weedkillers
nothing on where to get chemicals or whether there is any difference between those that farmer sand gardeners can use. 

-------------

Weed control in the home garden
1973
inside front cover is advert for weedol. - new, with paraquat and diquat. 
p6
Home Gardeners will find it convenient to remember that, very roughly, one gram or 1/30 ounce per ten square yards is the same as 1 lb per acre. 
results very on soil type, weather, climatic conditions, weed. Refers to full instructions in weedkiller packaging, which must be followed. 
weeds as competition. 
chemical weedkillers used judiciously

p10
relatively easy to use wk on paths or in lawns, weed control in crops is more ambitious. 
worth remembering that using weedkillers is rather like learning to drive - most of the initial terror disappears as you gain a little experience. When using a weedkiller new to you it is advisable to do preliminary trial - to see what happens under your contiditon. The golden rule of chemical weed control is "if you are not sure what you are about to do, don't attempt it"

p16 table 2 sodium chlorate is framed as a medium lasting persistent weedkiller, making more advanced weedkillers longer lasting (so shorter than Chlorpropham, Dichlobeni, Chlorthiamid, Diuron, or Simazine), whereas older books had put sodium chlorate as the longest. 
inside back cover is an advert for spray can that weedol can be used for

management, prevention are not mentioned. 
agricultural preps of paraquat are not mentioned. Nor is where to buy. 
----------
1980
Chemical weed control in your garden - Wisley Handbook
discussiono f seletive/ non selective p6
2,4D mecoprop and dichlorprop. 
non selective - sodium chlorate and ammonium sulpha mate and glphosate. first two are persistent and soluble so should not be used on ground content the roots of desirable plants and trees. glyphosate inactivated by the soil so can be used here. dalapon is selective at low doses, enhanced by directing spray to avoid crop. At higher doses it is non-selective. [the discussion by Willis was a bit more wide-ranging about this, but he was talking less about hormonal preps]
p7
soil applied residual herbicides - sodium chlorate, less persistent than simazine, propane to leaching. two applications required to keep ground weed free for a season. Thererofer for paths, simazine products are best. For control of wide range of weeds in non cropped area sodium chlorate more effective. 
follow instructions
p9 warning about sodium chlorate inflammable when dry (vegetation, timber and clothing) sodium chlorate and glyphosate corrosive to most metals except stainless steel. use plastic spray equipment and watering cans. 

p17 safety of using herbicides
p18 does mention concentrates for farmers and growers. dangerous if brought into the home for use in the garden. Gives name Gramoxone, fatal, deaths. Do not ask farmer friends to give you small quantitates. Tactfully decline any well meant but dangerous offers of assistance. 

p60
how to apply
proprietary dribble bars
granolas sprinkled on soil surface - punch holes in lid of a jar, fill with dose calculated for area dn sprinkle as evenly as poss over the measured area. 
weedkillers in form of solid stick, imprgnated rope wick, dabbed on individual weeds and ready to use guns, or hand sprayers and aerosols often containing marker foam to show which weeds have been dealt with. 
all products available to amateurs have been cleared under Pesticide Safety Precautions Scehem for safety to humans domestic animals nd wildlife when used in accordance with the instructions on the lane. 
divides pesticides into those approved for farmers and professionals and those for home gardeners. Now illegal for amateurs to obtain commercial products intended for professional use. 
p61 separate watering can/sprayer reserved for weedkillers. 
fill can outside, not at kitchen sink
do not put extra concentrate in, as stronger solutions may be less effective or cause serious damage. Left overs, do not store. 
p62  
gardeners not on mains drainage should dispose of surplus on soil, well away from pons, ditches and water sources. 
original labelled packaging, tightly coded. out of reach of children and pets, pre in locked cupboard, frost free place ,not the greenhouse, not near food) empty containers in the dustbin. 

--------------
Plant Protection in the Garden
foreword talks about moderation and care
but book shows that there is a vast range of chemicals available to the gardener

-------------

Weed control in the garden 
chancellor 1994
not much different to the previous 1988 version, though with added spot weeding diagram and hadn't notice the description of paraquat as well known - when none of the others are given quite this introduction. Also points out for "safety" the preparation .
---------

