Ginn, Digg for Victory

came away from reading this still feelign as if the acceptance of seasonality and low resource use were voluntary -they were resented. Especially when rationing extended long past the end of the War. 

DfV posed a unitary national figure of self-sacrifice, then on the othe rhand the fovt needed to provide reassurance that people were playing the role sucessfully and that it ws the right role for them to be playing. Statistics, however shaky, boosted morale by enabling people to believe they were undertaking effective national service of the highest order. Any figure would do, statistically visualising domestic food prodcutionwas about only one thing: victory, boltered by trust in govts competence through numbers.

Surely people’s lived experiernce can contradict this? I think that Ursula Buchan’s book deals with this topic much better.  

Good points form this article are the points from AGC “to allow for wartime increase in the number o occupiers growing veg and in the size of the plots the following fitures have been taken” ref 110

p298
10% of those surveyed used the Growmore Leaflet to guide cropping. People firstly rliesd on notes in newpapers, other gardeners and radio (cite by 70% respondeants) the most popular show being Mr Middleton’s In your garden.  ref 57 Only 34% gardeners named Dif For Victory when asked what govt publicity they had seen. ref 58

Perhaps see
Whitehand and Carr *Twentieth century suburbs:  amorphological Approach*  London 2001
J. Uglow *A little history of British Gardneing* 2005 IWM - no sources cited for figs!
Gardiner *Wartiem Britain 1939 − 1945* 
AJ Macself *The Women’s Treasury for Home and Garden* London Amateur Garening Offices 1936
S Nichols *THe Echo of War: Home front propaganda and the wartime BBC*
A Briggs *The Histor y of Broadcasting in the United Kingdon* 1995
M. Reed, “Fight the future! How the contemporary organic campaigns have arisen from their composting of the past” *Sociologia Ruralis* 41 (2001) 131-145; 
G. McKay, *Radical Gardening: Politics, Idealism and Rebellion in the Garden*, London, 2011.