OH Horticulture
An oral history project begun in 2001 to document through life story interviews British gardeners, plantsmen and women, garden designers, landscape architects, seed growers, market and organic gardeners, and horticulturists, and to chart the changes that occurred in gardens and gardening in the twentieth century.

(67 results but not all these are interviews)

interestingly, the collection seems to have been very underused, I can't find any references to it online at least. 

include chemi* - very few actually relating to chemicals, possibly include weed killer, herbicide (have searched docs for these too)

Down to Earth: An Oral History of British Horticulture
Stokes, Geoffrey, 1945 (speaker, male; interviewee; Secretary NSALG)
2004-02-25
Tape 4 Side A: Details of the origin of the NSALG from the Agricultural Organisation Society through the National Union of Allotment Holders. The two organisations joined together in 1930. The Society was very important during World War Two. They received seeds from Quakers in America. More history of the group. In 1988 GS found the organisation had lost direction slightly. It had received government funding and had included important people. Then the management committee lost business expertise. Now in the 21st century the Society is having to compete for access to funding. The organic movement supported by Henry Doubleday Research is active. The NSALG hasn't really looked at what its job should be. The movement has scope for change within the confines of early 20th century legislation. In 1908 there was consolidation of progress in the 19th century. In 1950 there was demand after the war. Now there is a recreational value, growing fruit and vegetables and flowers, so there needs to be a difference in persuading the government. Outskirts of towns have expanded and in 21st century councils find they are standing on an asset, and see the land as a cash bank. At the moment the Society with local allotment holders are resisting an attempt in Hampshire to be moved off their current site, which will be sold for housing, to a replacement site. More facilities may be offered, parking, shelter and so on, but the environment as a whole must be taken into consideration. Local regions must decide on their local circumstances, they may want to improve a site but that doesn't help individual plotholders. The strength of the NSALG is that it can co-ordinate expert advice and legal experience. There is more media interest now, the Gardeners World Special for instance in National Allotment Week last year. 
Tape 5 Side B: GS would like to see the Society move forward and change in the areas of protection of allotments and educational promotion. They need new ideas and younger thinking committees. The National Society does a good job. GS hopes that the job will have outgrown him and his role will have changed. New sites will be needed, new chemicals will come on the market. Garden shows with experts and general questions can't always be relied on. Advice may relate to the individual allotment. They do pass information on however, the in-house magazine has evolved as a source of information, the problem is in the perspective. GS's own garden is large and this kept the price of the house down 10 years ago. It was full of couch grass and bindweed and they had to use weed killer. They took out an internal hedge and replaced it with a pergola. It took 2 years to clear. He has a whole range of vegetables, 3 greenhouses and raised beds, and grows from cuttings and seeds. He learnt to experiment from his father-in-law's example. The garden is his real recreation. He has had massive heart problems and the specialist suggested gardening which pleased him. It has such healthy benefits. 

Down to Earth: An Oral History of British Horticulture
Humphris, John, 1936- (speaker, male; interviewee; head gardener)
2005-07-29
Tape 1 (F18384) Side B:His mother was a keen gardener in their small garden, but JH took no interest. Teaching was poor at his school. They spent time at Littlehay with Irene and Wilf and helping there made JH think of gardening as an option for future life. JH was physically quite strong, though he could not have become a farmer, being unable to carry out certain tasks. Possible jobs involved an apprenticeship at Kings Heath Park or with ICI [Imperial Chemical Industries] who had a new scheme to develop their land. This job he took, a five year apprenticeship with day release for City and Guilds leading to Royal Horticultural Society [RHS] exams. ICI had 500 acres with large expanses of greenhouses for pot plants for the offices. It was a revelation for JH to meet different sorts of people, old soldiers with stories of the Wars. The head gardener was a Parks man and they made beds and borders, and lawns.
Tape 2 (F18385) Side A: ICI was a wealthy, major industry, they paid the going rate plus expenses. 
Tape 3 (F18386) Side A: The kitchen garden was left full of weeds, and when the garden was opened once a year for charity, they had to rush round to tidy it up. 
Tape 5 (F18388) Side A: Health and safety regulations became an issue, with locked cupboards for chemicals and tools. (early 1980s?)
Tape 7 (F18390) Side A: They used a minimum amount of sprays. Discussion of organic methods. (Sutton Place - was this residential? NoHe redecorated it and hung some of his finest modern paintings there including a Bacon triptych. Although Mr Seeger stated he spent almost £1m a year on maintaining the house he rarely lived there. Frederick R. Koch. According to the Guardian newspaper he is said never to have spent a night 
-------------------------


Down to Earth: An Oral History of British Horticulture
Dodson, Harry, 1919 (speaker, male; interviewee; Head Gardener
2004-07-28, 2004-08-16 

Tape 7 Side B: Story of another time HD went on a panel in Newbury, but it was mainly about fruit plantations and chemicals. 
Tape 8 Side A: HD thinks there are too many seed firms now. The bags of compost that you get from the garden centres are much improved, and good value. They will grow everything once you have the technique. In the old days HD would mix his own with sulphate of ammonia, potash and superphosphate. HD is still a member of the RHS fruit and vegetable committee (which he was invited to join in 1956). 

Tape 8 Side B: They had open days at the gardens at Chilton and had to spruce up. Details of work then and now. This has always been a good estate for looking after the old people. HD helped people to move on after their 2 or 3 years with a good reference. HD liked doing other programmes and enjoyed working with Percy Thrower. 
-------------------

Sir Richard Carew Pole interviewed by Louise Brodie
Pole, Richard Carew (speaker, male; interviewee)
2006-10-05, 2006-11-01, 2006-11-23
Track 6 [36:09] RCP president of the Royal Show, which is for agricultural people. He has had a life rich in varied interests. The Tate St Ives was a turning point in his life, and being president of the RHS was a great thing. [9:15] As to climate change, he feels it could be a real disaster. At Antony they are careful in their use of chemicals, and they try to minimise damage in their lifestyle. 

------------------
Down to Earth: An Oral History of British Horticulture
Schwerdt, Pamela, 1930-, (speaker, female; interviewee)
2002-11-27

Tape 4 (F12397) Side A:The writings of VSW and Harold Nicholson [HN] brought more and more people to the garden. The hedges were out of control. There had been 3 mild winters and then the very severe winter of 1962-3 when VSW died. The cold killed many things off, but PS and SK were blamed for changes. Details of things that had to be done with the increase in visitors. A garden designed for 4 people is not suitable for 100,000. The seasonal interest must also be extended. If it is your own garden you don't count it when you change something. Example of the nut walk and primulas which were covered in celandines. They used chemicals to get rid of the celandines. Conservation is not about the re-creation of exactly the same garden. 
Tape 6 (F12398) Side A: They use a knapsack sprayer.
Tape 7 (F12400)Side B: The glasshouse and shed are on the lower level. They were rigorous about getting rid of weeds before planting and have never had to fork since. It is not a labour saving garden. 

Tape 8 (F12401) Side B: looking back PS and SK feel very lucky to have had their hobby as a job. 

----------------
Back to results list
Down to Earth: An Oral History of British Horticulture
Bloom, Alan, 1906-, (speaker, male; interviewee)

Tape 11 Side A: Horticultural chemists can fix problems. Weed killing used to be a full time job. Rabbits used to be a problem till myxamatosis came along. Story. Comments on moles, squirrels and magpies. AB's assessment of self and life: you never reach perfection, always keep on trying. His helpers were his friends. Always respect the soil. The wonder of the rhythm of nature. AB made mistakes through impatience. 
-------------
Down to Earth: An Oral History of British Horticulture
Bickell, Christopher, 1932-, (speaker, male; interviewee, Botanist
2003-08-06, 2003-09-08


Tape 2 Side A: CB's mother moved to Reading, as there was tension between the parents. CB went to work at Thomas Carlisle's [TC] nursery at Twyford where he did a lot of weeding and pot washing at first. 

Tape 3 Side A: CB's first job was with the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, on pests in stored sack

Tape 6 Side A: The RHS has been regarded as an elitist charity. Not true actually though it might have been more so in the past. Description of the varied types of people who serve the RHS now. There are about 50 committees and these include commercial horticulturalists and enthusiastic amateurs. There are 16 members on the council. There are now local shows around the regions, and so more local people get involved. T

--------------

Lawrence Banks interviewed by Louise Brodie
Banks, Lawrence (speaker, male; interviewee)
2006-11-16, 2006-11-17

Track 1: His father, Dick Banks was brought up at Ridgebourne, went to Rugby school and worked for ICI, setting up the Indian chemical industry. He was an intelligent and outgoing man, passionate about gardening and travel. 

nothgin else here about chems, sprays, weed, herbicide
-----------------
	
Down to Earth: An Oral History of British Horticulture
Brookes, John, 1933- (speaker, male; interviewee; garden designer)
2005.12.12, 2006.02.02

Tape 6 (F17961) side B: The lawn has to be dispensed with, and the shed for the lawn mower. Gravel is a good substitute. There should be lots of evergreen shrubs, sculpture and seats. However, the magazines still continue with old ideas when they have to advertise the machines and chemicals. The young are interested in growing their own vegetables and herbs. JB used to do a slot on Gardeners World BBC TV, writing the script, producing and presenting it.
Tape 8 (F17963) side A:  He would like the media to take up the environmental issues in gardening and to do growing and cooking articles and programmes. The establishment and society has to move along first, to modernise. Garden design is a product of the culture, not its leader. 

sprays, herbicides doesn't yield anything more 
-----------

Andrew Dunn and Nick Dunn interviewed by Louise Brodie
Dunn, Andrew, 1916- (speaker, male; interviewee Tree Nursery owner)

End of track 1: He hired a wharf to unload all the horse manure he needed from London. They also used hoof and horn from Argentina as fertiliser, shoddy from the mills and goosequills, also spent hops. [1:21:58] Men on the farms today may be obese and have no muscle. After the war business was mostly apples and pears, but the orchard growers are not prosperous today. [1:26:46] AD would bud all hours in season, and enjoyed the fresh air and good company. Herbicide was used for weeds, which only penetrated the top half inch of soil. Newspapers make a hash of news about organic matters. 