PEst Control without poisons by Larence D Hills
Henry Doublda yResearch Asssociation
ch on chem and the Law - Robert SW Pollard author of law reforem and the countryside

3rd ed

Preface (Lawrence Haills) 

...The first two eds sold 20 000 copies and now this third 10 000 makes a record in modern publishing - it is still the same price as in 1964, 3s 6d post free because we would like another 10000 gardeners to give up dangersou pesticides as soon as possible.

Main alterations list of suppliers because so many sound remedies have been replaced by deadlier and more profitable substitutes and it is for this reason that the stress is on a d-i-y recipes, There are so many alternatives andt those who are organic gardeners adn do not wish to use nicotine, which only stays dangerous for 24 hours, are referred to the booklets advertised at the back esp Bio Pest Control. We have a Braille edition of our small pamphlet In Place of Poisons and offer this free to all blind gardeners and those concerned with the r welfare for it is even more important than for the sighted public that those who cannot read any warning on the bottles and packets should use these safe methods. 

*This bit about blind gardeners is really interesting, they haven't been mentioned in anything else I've read, apart from the product packaging stuff  - never in articles or in other books or other discussions about poisonings*

Foreward  (John Cripps editor of The Coutnryman) 

"We all want to be 'with it', in gardening as in everything else, and chem mfc are quick to recognize and exploit the fact The kow too how to compound forbidding figures and letters in ingenious and appealing names until we forget the complexities behind the. It is so easy to sprinkle a little powder over the ve polot or spray plants with a n aerosol - so simply operated = without realising to what this may lead....

Nearly all the prpe have been submitted to the judement of experts and bear the stamp of official approval. Who are we to question their verdicts? ....
Some lethal products still being widely recommended to gardeners but do the apparent benefits justify the possible risks entailed for all forms of life including our own? ....

Greatly indebted to Lawrence Hills forthis compilation  -the first of its kind = of safe alterantives, with just rht right amt of infomation about the principle garden pest. It will take a great load of the minds of thousands of worried gardeners adn bird lovers who have searche din vain for the advice here offered. 

p3

Starts by referencing RC inc publisher and price 25s (this sounds like a lot?) 
"Every gardener who has read RC masterpiece adn has followed the progress of British poisons in the Press, or any of the hundreds of articles and scientific papers on the danger to wild life of modern chemicals will wish to keep these dangers out of his own garden.:

mentions Merthyr Tdyfil and Smarden

All chems being as safe as thalidomide began as a tranquilizer and as many garderners read whatever the current diastter may be in the PRess or in the many books that are written to warn us of these dangers they amy well fewll th atnew pesticces are safe onlun until they are round out. 

Before modern chemicals were invented our fathers and grandfathers grew fruit and veg as good as any in our gardens today, using pest control methods which may not have been so quick and effective but were safeer for birds, bees and men. 

*I started reading this thinking that the language was just gendered as in man-kind, very normal for then, but that last para on the page about fathers and gradfathers is quite interesting as it positions them as the practiioners, unless consistency is the driver of the phrase*

p4

It is almost as espensive to be a horticultural hypochondriac and spray for everything you might have, as to read a medical dictionary imagine you have every disease in it and take a pill for every ill with every meal. Prevention is more profitable than cure so it is easy to spend more on chemicals than the retail value of your vegetables, whn your neighbour who does not bother has a garden just as good. 

p5
We are not concerne so much with the Balance of Nature in this booklet but the immediate question of 'How does Smith garden without keeping up with Jones who has a whole shelf full of chemicals, and how can we copy him?'

PEsts through cunning - all mechanical means pruning, grease bands, hiding places

killing soluion - tipping weevils in tto strong Pidero, 2fl oz to a pin will produce a kill by morning. Can't fidn what Pidero is. Is always capitalised, also used for spraying (or derris) for raspberry beetle. Ah... at the back Pidero is the name of a derris and pyrethrum liquid mixture made by Bugges insecticide

p17 
Many of the tricks in this ch will be known to all the older generation of gardeners, and a number of them work very well whne the pest is not too bad. Itis so easy to spend more on pesticides than the cost of buying your veg when an expensive remedy can rust throguh the sides of the tin before you need it again. Therefore it pays to use these dodging methods when ever they are possible. 

p59
Bordeaux mixture
may and baker
liquid copper funcidie from murphy chem co is a better colloidal copper. Buisol is no tlonger made. 

Burgandy mixture
Boots Cehmists still sell Copper Sulphate. Dissove 3 oz in a gallon of hot water in a plastic bucket, leave overnight then stire 4 oz washing sod in a gallon of cold water, mixt the two an spray but not on anything with leaves. Use between late nove and early March. 

p56

part of The Law on Chemicals and the Gardener (interesting section with lots of worst case scenerios of poisoned neighbours trees, ponds and bees, trespassers dogs etc)  

harmless *when used as directed*
surprising to read the caution after the statemnt that it is harmless but of cours the important words are 'when used as directed', If the caution can be read, it will be seen that this parcic chemi ahs to tbe used n stored with great care and this manfe does not say that he discalimes responsibility but he hopes to avoid responsibility by setting out in detail the precaustion which a user of the chem must take. No doubt if the user of the chemical is cognisant of these precautions (p57)  he will observe thenm and it will be his own faulit if he is injured by reason of some failure to observe them. If all the precaustions recommended are taken, injury is still caused then the mfcr is liable. He has printed the caution on the label in such small type that tis is very difficult to read. If an effort is made, the label can be read and users of these garden chems can be presumed in law to know that they must read the instruction on the labels on any purchase of a garden chemical. 

... shoul dnot the eact constittion o fthe preparation be stated in detail on the bottle as it has to be done in the case of food and drink? It is though tthat in addition ot ht e scientific names and the exact quatntities of each substance in the prpearation the popular name if ther eis one ought to be given as well. 

Then there is a requirement in the Food and Drugs Act that particulars must be easily read. 
	this req is for quantities of a subs 'to be marked in leigle chagarcter in a prominent place upon the label where it can easily be read. The Parhm and Poisons Acts 1933 and the rules from time to time made there under amy also be referred to; the prescribed particulars must appear consipiculously clearly and distinctly on the continer in which the poison is sold or supplied. 
	