Practical Gardening
1963
Jan p9
no soil - pliable, synthetic growth medium. polyurethane impregnated with plant nutrients. 

Jan p19 worms in lawn - after mowrah meal - use either sulphate of ammonia or a lawn sand dressing in spring. 

Jan p37 Plant Doctore Dr David Hessayon
harnessing hormones. medical ring, think of yuman and animal preps which must be handled with care. Raises question of safety  of handling plant hormones. Fort unrelated and no similarity to each other. Dealing with products where are among the safe test of all gardening chems and there is no risk at all of producing the odd effects of human hormones. Risk to plant life. change whole growth pattern, essential to follwe instructions. do not overdose. Rooting hormones, fruit drop preventing, fruit setting, weed killing, growth retarding

no adverts for chems.
-------------
MArch 
fumigation advert 
crystanth food kills pests as you feed
Tudor insecticide spray
dicotox weedkiller
welgro and sling pack sprayer

april
p4 murphy chem co
p6 fisons fairwary

p10 Reckitt's Thrive fertiliser - did nnot know they did frets
p11 killaspray/ twistakil
p14 feed and weed
p17 phostrogen no smell no trouble
p30 sod chlorate to kill bindweed
p34 velvas green with envy ad non-user
p78 Turfex 
p85 Spray em - ppl - pests
p93 sprayers - man and womanp
96 supertox, dicotox 

---------
may much the same

----------
june
excellent Dad says you're soppy ad for insectcide
p13 looking ahead - weed free strawberries - experiments continued with new residual herbicide tested during last 2 yrs on strawbs and peas. Chloroxuron without damage to crops. 

p17
chemical free product - liquid ferts which do not contain chems and do not contain slaughter house, fish or poultry waste (vegetarian) G Walker Walsall Staffs
Chemical free animal product free fertiliser in liquid form is Maxicrop, available form local garden shop. Liquified seaweed.  
slime on paths - Mrs Mc Lean Fife Scotland. Bordeaux powder, or household bleach

p20
weed control prospers  - Looking ahead referred to chem weed control instead of cultivation. Is anything available yet? HJ Goss, Cardiff
number of weedkillers available to prof soft fuit grower such as simazine, diquat and paraquat. At the present time these products are not available to the amateur gardener in small packs but we belie within a ur or 2 soft fruit selective herbicie will be seen in garden shops. We shall certainly announce its arrival in PG!

p28 variety of synchemicals products - weedkillers
p31 REckitts sprays
p52-53 Get a better lawn RB Dawson 
p65 War on weeds 0 illustrated
p86 Murphy chemicals insecticides full page ad, write in for chart
p90 DDT and pyrethrum

-----------
july - not so much 

-----------
august
only copying the thing about plastic bags and vacuum cleaner dirt for hist-tech purposes. 
more on polythene p 11 - lining seed boxes with polythene in substitute of crocks= black best, then green, but even with white better results than unlined. MRs B Lee from leamington Spa.

p13 weeds below hedge. please advise what to spray. HL Wallace, Newtownards N Ireland
unfortunately no weedkiller which you could safely use right up to the hedge. weeded can be used close to established trees, but a hallow rooting hedge could be damaged. Careful use of flame gun otherwise it must be the hoe. 

----------

sept
bemoaning high price of garden chems (p3) Stan russell over the fence. Of no consequence, didn't go any further. 
p7 - poisons - plant poisons only. emetic 
inside back cover - flame gun advert
-------

oct
p60 fisons weeded - look ahead to next year's garden
handy hints p70 dissolve coarse salt alb in gallon of hot water - cheap and effective weedkiller for paths, keeps weeds down 2-3 months

--------\
nov
p11 growth retardant spray for privet and evergreen we head now of a similar product for treating lawns. may reach Britain shortly (from the Continent)

p25 Killing seedling weeds - I have heard that a product has been introduced that kills seeds of weeds in the soil before germination. Could you let me know its name and that of the makers? PM Norwell-Smith, Leicester. There is no product that spacifically kills the seeds of weeds. However there are products which kill germinating weed seeds before the crop emerges. An e.g. is Herbon Garden Herbicide, from Herbon Litd Landford Salibury Wilts. 

------
dec 

p17 Looking ahead: expect more frequent news about new chems for gardening use. Ambac - the association of british manufacturers of ag chemo has appointed a full time info officer to bring gardeners up to date with debs. Makers of fee, weed and pest killers have been shot at recently from variou squatters and this move could help to show that particularly so far as gardeners are concerned they do far more good than harm.  

chemicals do not feature in gift guide
---------
march - 
p17 poisons - plant poisons esp children - avoid poppy laburnum, monkshood, larkspur, delphinium, fox glove, thorn apple, laurel, yew, privet and snowberry. 

p44 experiments at Longleat Gardens to destroy weeds without chem weedkillers. Success with black polythene - if weediest piece can be spared or a season. 

-----------
april 1964 
editorial p3
p13 looking ahead first aid bar
p43 dosage chart
p88 don't risk killers - hormone weedkillers in lawn - delay
p92 Velvas lawn sand

-------
may 
editorial p3
p43 lighter fuel bottle for weedkiller
p42 simazine
105 reckitts - see the A symbol

------
june
reader survey - find out more, free trowels for the first 500 to respond
p15 lawn sand risk - mercurised lawn sand to kill moss, will it harm 3yr old bush apple trees
can use to kill moss in the grass under your apple trees wo any risk of damaging trees. 
p17 weedkiller wanted - EJ Cooper SEaview IoW please give details of any weedkiller which is harmless to shrubs and lawns. I have a large are of crazy paving, paths and drives to keep free from weeds. No weedkillers guar netted to be harmless to both shrubs and lawns. Sod chlorate often used as total plant killer on paths and fires and a safer produce is WEedex. However, both must be kept wary from lawn and garden plants. 
p19 weed problem - speedwell selective weedkiller no good. R Reddy Kent, Speedwell increasing menace. Conintual clearing and hoeing is all you can do in the flower border. Hormone weedkillers are not effective in lawns. Lawn sand is more successful and this will do a good burning out job if applied now that the grass is growing well.

p31 Berk chemicals touch weeder
p73 pbi medipacks 

--------july
destroy bind weed  p26

------------
1966
May (this is where the box starts )
photographed the advertisers - no Plant Protection or ICI
chemicals editorial p3 - though this is about insect pests rather than weeds when you get to the article itself
fisons weedex
jeyes p45
sodium chlorate ad

----------
june
soil testing

july 
resistance p7

sepember weedol for mares tail! p24
paraquat as marker - p3

oct
bindweed 
lawn weed p19
user sprayer paraquat type p65

----------August 67
bentlesy stone cleaner - wear gloves p14

June 67
Selex on weeds

april 67
synchemicals 44
Lawn care jim arthur - 54-55
roger DuBern easy weed killing p73
save time sowing - 76-77
fisons Simweed 6 p97

feb 67 weed problem - weedol burn off top growth p22
ladies spades = medium


jan 67
couch grass p13
moss cure p17

dec 66
clearer labels p5
sodium chlorate for hawthorn hedge
weedol for charlock and thistles p20
metasystox gun for controlling black or green fly and minispray are in december gift guide

nov 66 p3 
find out what readers want
25 labour saving ideas p31

--------nov 67 
p14 weed worry paint on weedol
---------
dec 67
gifts for gardeners soil test kit  p55

--------
feb 68 
p11 looking ahead: pesticide booklet concerning code of conduct in use and handling
aim to educated the public in dangers and advantages of using chemicals for pest control 

p57 stamp out weeds - ground cover

--------
march 68 
p21 
looking ahead: chemical disbudding DDT overdose

---------
april 1970 
p4 editorial over the fence - after DDT
p33 paraquat based weedkill = shift from saying Weedol.
p52 - whole page April in the garden with ICI small weedol section 
 p110 flortis  - from your florist
----------
may 1970
p40 may in the garden with ICI

---------
june 
p2 editorial killer hysteria
p22 mares tail - brushwood killer
p32 June in the garden
p62-63 know your soil - kits not acid, or tasting

----------
july 1970
p7 looking forward: water soluble packs of weedkillers avoid contact /measuring out coming soon
--------
august 1970 
win the weed war - multi page article
despite the fact that by august even fewer chems are advertised than at the start of summer
p11 paraquat based weedkiller (weedol). the spray must not touch the plants [confusing, though he means plants as in not weeds, this is in a flower bed]
---------
sept 1970 
p25 unidentified plant defoliation - could not locate sign of virus/infection so blaming either unwashed watering can or spray drift from neighbour
----------
march 1971

p33march in the garden with ICIc
p11 weedol (paraquat_ to kill celandine or to kill completely is to render ground sterile for 6 mo or so by the use of sodium chlorate. should be used according to mfcrs directions
----------
april 
p26 casoron granular weedkiller - packaging has illustration of using hand. 
supplement 21 use weedkillers - various methods are given and explained
p69 look round ICI/ppl labs
p89 April in the garden with ICI, weedol offer 
----------
may
p11 sodium chlorate to kill horsetails allow for creeping. don't use near fuit trees. Try repeated applications of Weedol if near other plants. 
supplement 7 paraquat, sodium chlorate
p70 roundabout disappearing poisons
p82 may in the garden with ICI - now has diquat
----------
june 1971
p30 murphy products - sprinkle on ramrod, man user of lawn chem
also casoron G p34
p70 June in the garden with ICI 

--------
july 1971
you're telling us p5
mentionnes disappearing poisons. 
p13 pearl is no jewel - various weedkillers
-----------
september 1971 
p3 why you have weeds anti/pro DDT america


---------
april 1976 
p96 bamboo invasion - weedol new canes, could use sodium chore sterile ground 9-10 months, creeps in soil damage nearby plants
---------
march 1976
cover story - choosing and using weedkillers
p10 and 11 and 12
but march is too early for advertisers to have put in. 

---------
feb 1976
p5 editorial chemicals - less concerned with weeds than insects by market value. 
pat's patch p70 - does not name weedkiller that becomes inactivated on contact with soil

--------
july 1975
Weedol p62 farmer's land/ weeds
Banish weeds feature 59-61 
safety rules - keep out of reach of children, return partly used packs and tins to safe place beofe bringing work. 
never transfer to soft drink bottles. 
read all the instructions
mix thoroughly and carefully
avoid mixing herbicides in the kitchen 0 do it outside. 
wash out sprayers and watering cans with detergent, hard to remove every trace from plastic containers, use a separate can
safe disposal of containers - wash out, then burn or bury or put the m in the dustbin. flatten metal containers, never use them for any other purpose. 
wash hands 



--------
1980 april
safety 
very poisonous. follow directions to a T, never combine

may 1980 weedol advert

july 1980 - cranks, FoE p 7
aug - FoE p7  Nitro-chalk available p7
oct 1980 prices chemicals p7 
nov 1980 - allotment plots uncultivated %50 p7 
chemicals not included in the nov 1980 gift list
dec 80 - soil testing for heathers
women on allotments p20-21
Jan 81 - chemical scare - p7
ground cover instead of weedkiller

March 81
sodium chlorate p64
April 81 how to outwit your weeds - change from battle? 
p46 - titdy a tatty lawn - aerosols liquid /gel 
murphy cover shield - p53 does not say what's in it. 

May - Nature issue
"Make Nature work for you" is title on front
followed by feature on organic gardening though this does not mean that the magazine do not also carry adverts for chemicals products:
 Boots adp15
WEedol p21
Murphy's tumpble weed (glyphosate) p29

--------
June 1981 -
editorial p3 how branded products get their names
p7 Cutlass advert ICI
p43 touch weeder - does not contain dioxin
p48 Boots advert - down to earth prices and special offers on garden chemicals (in response to various gripes about prices being high probably)
-------
july
letters p4 garden full f weeds w deep roots. pulled them out, keep growing. Safe weed poison also safe with dog in the garden? R adinolfe London SW9
Murphy's tumbleweed is totally safe when used as directed, will not harm you or your dog. Any tough ones that grow again can be spot weeded with the gel form or the economical touchweeder. 

p10 Worms eye view - Graham Rice - Hooray no more weeding. 
forced to confess Murphy's cover shied is good. dramatic contrast. using it all over the place. Disadvantage is that any seeds dropped from annuals herbaceous plants or shrubs it will stop these coming up and you'll lose a valuable source of new plants. Peace of mind at a very busy time of year. 

--------
August
DIY pesticides - pest control wo poisons - HDRA
p45
No-weed seems to have very similar copy to dewed
-------
October 81
WEedol Advert p15
the weedkiller that's not a washout in autumn. 


closure of small holding magazine, taken on Clay Jones to write about self sufficiency (in response to reader survey) 
----------
March 1982 
Beat the weeds chemical warfare

--------
March 1988
p10 and p34 Plantex - textile instead of sickly smells of weedkiller
p10 appears to be magazine written, but use stock photography from company see p34
also from 1982 and in this one I have seen ASA adverts  -you can complain about adverts. 

April 88
soil test free - and article 29 
mosskiller advert on back outer cover
generally much less enthusiasm for chems

May

June88
lawn feed and weed p21 

October 88 - not in front of the gardeners, object to ads for cigarettes (despite smoking paraphernalia being advertised in PG for decades_

December 88
p63 how to banish moss from drive way blocks - recommends various products for eleim moss from hard surfaces inc ICI clean up, also offers alternative of not want to buy special product and can be sure that the water won't run onto plants, then use a fairly strong solution of washing soda or bleach in warm water with some added detergent. Scrub into drive with stiff brush

organic tips start in 1989 March
 

