Radical Gardening 
George McKay

p162
allotment culture revival - ecoconciousness, non commercial, pragmatic fact of smaller domestic gardens. Jellis - women make up more the 75% waiting lists for new plots. Late 60s only 2% allotment holders were women'

1979 allotment campaign guide - Friends of the Earth
FoE 1975 Campaign around waste land use.
15 March as D Day or Dig in Day - draw attention to derelict land and acknowledge demand for allotments. make the point that its possible to grow food without oil  - used horse drawn plough.

p42
influential in ag and hort, but also way of liveng, lifelty choice and political world view
live in harmony rather than dominate nature
quieter and more localised counter-narrative that developed as some in farms dn gardens grew uneasy with the scale of the tech and chemical turn that was taking place. 
p43
radical right - not to imply that organic movement is fascist, but to illustrate that act of gardening can be ideologically fluid and that radical gardening can be dangerous and regressive as well as potentially [rogressive and liberator. 
Facist gardener and racists who particular their racism through gardens and they need to be included. 
p44
'rule of return'  
in britain organicism was expressed and championed by high profile, privileged, individuals, landed estates. 

p45
Silent Spring makes the domestic connection explicitly, and identifies the complicity of gardening media and gaps in essential info about h&s. 
Carson: 'Gardening is now firmly linked with the super poisons. Every hardware, garden supply store ... has rows of insecticides for every conceivable horticultural situation. Those who fail to make wide use of this array of lethal sprays and dusters are by implication remiss, for almost every newspapers garden page and the majority of garden magazine take their user for granted... little is done to warn the gardener that he is handling extremely dangerous materials.'

p46 distrust of chemicals, key factors in new wave of organic sensibility and actives. 

p50
Gunter Vogt
'between the 2 world wars 'modern' chemical intensive, technically advanced farming faced a crisis in the form of soil degradation, poor food quality and the decay of rural social life and traditions. As a solution to this crisis. organic farming pioneers offered a convincing science based theory during the 1920s and 30s that became a successful farming system during the 1930s and 1940s. But it was not until the 1970s with growing awareness of an env crisis that organic farming attracted interest in the wider worlds of agriculture society and policy. 

Interwar organicists were interested in increasing pro ducting with higher yields connected to economic growth, the recent British env has been sometimes wilfully snit-commercial, viewing agribusiness as the problem to be challenged. Burchardt  'Organicism was clearly a movement of the political right, even if with some of the Env since the 60s has been strongly associated with the left and sometimes svn with the most radical anarchist elements of the left. 


p51 
what is overlooked is the extent discourse and practice of organic has entered the everyday and domestic. Due to mediation of organicism - BBC Gardeners World removed Percy Thrower, while another GeoffHamilton 'was credited with "almost single-handedly taking organic gardening out of the realm of the cranky and into the mainstream"' ref 6= Frances Bonner, Digging for difference: British and Australian television gardening programmes

garden rather than farm is the privilege space of action for socio horticultural change today - differing from the early 20th C. 

magic O - diluted the message? 

p52 'certified organic farms still engage in harmful practices - black plastic or excessive fossil fuels whereas some small ecologically sound farms choose not to certify themselves for a number of reasons. ' ref 7

Cuba - back to basics without Soviet oil for tractors or fertiliser. (Andrew Buncombe) 

Peace
p70 connections with grading - future oriented, nut ruing, impermanence and cyclic
impact of wars on practice, transforming land use
p74
where might the military garden have survived - the RHS provided a home for many senior servicemen, its upper ranks sprinkled with Field Marshal et. She suggests tongue only slightly in cheek that the small gardens of Britain traditional military neatness has been retained. Immaculate trenching, ridging and earthing up of potatoes or celery in the line of guardsmen-red salvia marching beside the path...

p76
'CH Middleton used rubble from bombed buildings to make rock gardens in public parks as a permanent memorial to those who suffered during air raids ' ref 6

p136 
Perenyi: garden was less a zone of liberation than a place which excluded them notably during menstruation or even imprisoned them. 


p140
smashing and damaging of public gardens and Kew property by suffragetes - refusal to be a rare and delicate plant Perenyi
Jenny Uglow - for radical women, gardening could represent everything domineering in the British establishment. Women far from delicate would not be kept under glass any more.

p142
gardening and farming generally been male dominated or where the female contribution was downgraded (menial) so a worthy challenge to the expectations and limitations. Profusion of new gardening books for women shows that the garden was an increasingly significant aspect of middle class identity, especially in the female oriented domestic sphere. It was connected with opportunities in education and new social movements. Alternatively gentle/ fragile flower model of femininity was one that feminists attacked, garden was understood as standing for male property. Early 20C when crisis o f war, collapse of imperial consensus, workers and women's rights, radical gardening made education in women only horticultural colleges or a new career path in garden design possible. 



