
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/v009/9.4.sivulka.html
Browse > Social Sciences > Business and Society > Advertising & Society Review > Volume 9, Issue 4, 2008
The Fabulous Fifties:
Selling Mr. and Mrs. Consumer
Juliann Sivulka (bio)
The new medium of television presented America with dozens of model wives on programs like The Donna Reed Show, Leave It to Beaver, and Father Knows Best. Television commercials and advertisements in women’s magazines then glorified the typical housewife’s everyday life and constantly reminded the American woman of everything she ought to be. These images displayed idealized fifties women with freshly shampooed hair, whiter-than-white teeth, fresh breath, and smooth skin that all ended with romance and eventually marriage. Elegantly attired models clad in Dior gowns extolled the virtues of everything from refrigerators to dishwashing detergent, showing how the latest product or new technology removed drudgery from household chores.
What Betty Friedan and other feminist critics later deemed as sexualizing American women and stereotyping their role in society as mothers, wives, and servants of men was not an all-male development by men’s institutions and advertising—that is, solely the work of the businessman and the ad man. For one thing, these commercial images were largely created for women by women. At every level of marketing and advertising activity for the women’s market—cosmetics, fashion, food, home furnishings, housewares, and even the key financial services and automotive industries—women had become involved. The very notion of this business of femininity contradicts feminist theories that claimed it was the ad men, acting from their limited ideas of female character and aspirations, who turned women into sex objects and portrayed them in narrow roles. In doing so, they discounted or even ignored significant market-oriented women’s contributions in the mass-consumer goods industries.
Certainly women in marketing, advertising, and public relations in the 1950s had a different view of their work from feminist critics. For example, the glamorous Betty Furness recognized the value of her appearance to become a credible television spokesperson. Three of the most famous cosmetic and fashion campaigns of the 1950s were created by women, Kay Daly for Revlon, Mary Fillius for Maidenform, and Shirley Polykoff for Clairol hair coloring, and all used sex as a basis of their appeals. The very appearance of female industrial designers to add the feminine touch to automotive design suggests a broad-based demand for women’s sensibilities to reach the expanding women’s market. The whole mass-consumer goods industry seemed intent on pushing exaggerated statements of gender. But, in fact, things would never be the same.
The Advertising Profession in the 1950s
In the years since World War II, for the most part, there continued to be a general breaking down of barriers by working women. They especially were welcome in advertising agencies and selling fields to service “female interest” accounts, as the number of agencies tripled in the nine-year period from 1939 to 1948 to meet industry demand, and they were offered a sizeable number of new jobs. By 1950 women accounted for about one-third of the workers in the advertising industry alone (38,859), according to the federal census. This trend would continue in the decades to follow, as women created jobs for women, organized associations, and utilized networks as expressions of solidarity and support.
These numbers revealed just how far the woman’s touch, or the feminine viewpoint, had progressed. The view that because a woman possessed a certain mysterious quality, ad makers felt that she could facilitate communications between manufacturers and Mrs. Consumer, or the women’s market. Hence, agencies and industry hired more and more women to work as writers, artists, and merchandising experts; research workers, media analysts, administrators; models and spokespersons; and people who knew graphic arts, radio, and television production. Women also proved effective in direct sales to the women’s market.
To communicate with Mrs. Consumer, these cultural mediators would make use of things they already knew just by being a member of the same gender. They would select the most familiar pictures, the heroines, the best-known narratives, the prejudices, as well as the hopes, dreams, and fears to appeal to other women. However, these cultural mediators also were a product of their own upbringing, so it was not unusual to see some of their personal experience reflected in their communications. Thus, women understand other women much better than men do, so thought the industry; most men did not understand women at all. “Though the largest part of consumer spending is done by women, it is fantastic how little the average businessman understands feminine psychological goals,” noted sociologist Pierre Martineau. “We men spend a lifetime associating with women—our mothers, our sisters, our wives, and even our own daughters—yet it never dawns on us that they have fundamentally different motives and interests.”1
Postwar women who aspired to a career in advertising turned to numerous booklets, books, and other vocational guidance. In 1946, for example, Maureen Daly, an associate editor for Ladies’ Home Journal, wrote the booklet Advertising for the magazine, which provided ideas on how aspiring young women could fit in advertising and what they could earn. In the career guide, B. J. Kidd, then a female vice president for Lewis & Gilman, Inc., and secretary of the Advertising Federation of America, reminded readers: “You are not competing with men with whom you come into business contact. You are complementing them by supplying the one factor they cannot obtain elsewhere—your own femininity.” Kay Daly, copywriter for Foote, Cone & Belding, advised readers that a retail background was invaluable for work in an advertising agency. Other experts like Bernice Fitz-Gibbon reminded women that to be a good copywriter, they should go to college, take “impractical” courses that would give them a rich cultural background, but also learn to type fifty words a minute.
Others turned to Mary McBride’s How to Be a Successful Advertising Woman (1948), published by the Advertising Women of New York. The book featured the capsule careers of a number of successful women who told one thing—there was no rigid formula for success in the business world, because there were no training programs—at any agency. Nonetheless, a number of ad women filled top executive positions, opened their own agencies, and came to serve as role models for this new generation. McBride herself had become a well-known broadcaster on the radio in the 1930s and 1940s. By the 1950s, more women handled commercials on radio and television than ever before, and they increasingly held positions as copywriters and at the administrative and management levels. Practically every agency of any size also maintained a well-staffed research library, hired researchers on the marketplace, and built in-house television production facilities. In addition, agencies like BBDO, JWT, and the Gardner agency had realized that investments like home economics departments were necessary to ensure complete account servicing (figure 1).
Figure 1. 
Advertising Opportunities for Women from A to V, according to Dorothy Dignam in 1949. Source: “How to Land That Advertising Job,” a 1949 supplement to How to Be a Successful Advertising Woman, Dorothy Dignam Collection, Box 3, Folder 19, Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University.
View full resolution
Among women in food advertising, perhaps Jean Rindlaub at BBDO was the best known in the 1950s. Before working on Campbell’s Soup for many years, she wrote campaigns for Community Silver (“Back Home for Keeps”) that resonated as a wartime theme, as well as for General Mills and Artcarved Rings (figures 2 and 3).
Figure 2. 
Jane Rindlaub. Photo from American Advertising Federation Hall of Fame.
View full resolution
Figure 3. 
In this ad for Community Silver, the theme “Back Home for Keeps” resonated with the wartime generation. Good Housekeeping, May 1945.
View full resolution
Instead of focusing on the Campbell Kids for Campbell’s Soup, she stressed health claims, fitness issues, good taste (“Mmm good”), and serving suggestions like chilled soup (“Soup on the Rocks”). She also supervised the introduction of Velveeta cheese. In Rindlaub’s thirty-four years at BBDO, she became vice president in 1946, the first woman at that level, and in 1954, she became the first woman on the advertising board. The American Advertising Federation named her Woman of the Year in 1951 and in 1989 elected her to its Advertising Hall of Fame (figure 4).2
Figure 4. 
Founded in 1948, the American Advertising Federation honors advertising leaders who made significant contributions to the advertising industry and its reputation and who made volunteer efforts outside the workplace. Since then eleven women have been inducted as members. Source: American Advertising Federation Hall of Fame.
View full resolution
A number of women throughout the mid-century also found business opportunities in sex-typed industries. In 1954, for example, the largest percentage of women who owned their own businesses were in retailing (32.5 percent), compared to only 3.8 percent of the enterprises in printing, advertising, and editorial. This entrepreneurship trend is evidence in the careers of Bernice Fitz-Gibbon and Margaret Hockaday.3
After twenty-five years of writing copy for Macy’s and Gimbels, Fitz-Gibbon followed the entrepreneurial trend and opened up her own shop—Bernice Fitz-Gibbon, Inc. By concentrating on retail work, the company specialized in institutional campaigns, anniversary celebrations, and openings of new stores. Fitz-Gibbon’s agency was small, as were most women-owned companies, since family responsibilities or access to capital often limited the size of such businesses. To keep the overhead low, Fitz-Gibbon relied on freelance talent from her Gimbels, Wanamaker’s, and Macy’s trainees. The business also allowed flexibility for the demands of motherhood, while providing her with an outlet for her entrepreneurial drive and the potential to earn a lot of money. Fitz-Gibbon also accepted numerous invitations to speak to groups and organizations and wrote numerous articles for women’s magazines. Her topics included how to get a job and make money and a woman’s place in business.
Although Fitz-Gibbon favored sincerity and clever copy, Hockaday “injected fashion” into retail ads. A Vassar graduate, Hockaday began her career as a copywriter for Marshall Field in 1929 and also spent time as a fashion editor with Harper’s Bazaar, Vogue, J. Walter Thompson agency, and Montgomery Ward stores. As World War II came to a close, she, along with art director Alvin Chereskin, borrowed a small amount of capital, rented space, and opened a little shop in New York City in 1949, and in came the clients. Their inventive and offbeat approach can be best seen in the campaigns for Capezio footwear, Dunbar furniture, and Jantzen swimsuits (“Just wear a smile and a Jantzen”), which featured imaginative copy and modern European graphic design that used universal symbols, dynamic composition, and modern typography (figure 5).
Figure 5. 
After Margaret Hockaday’s Dunbar furniture campaign was launched in the early fifties, the chairs turned up in the most unusual places. New York Times Sunday Magazine, October 16, 1954.
View full resolution
Despite all the talk of new opportunities and successes in the profession, the idea that women were moving in force into the upper echelons of advertising agencies was largely a myth, reported Printers’ Ink in 1960. Although women had made gains in the advertising field during World War II, since then, the journal claimed, they’d done little more than hold their ground. Most women found themselves in positions segregated into women’s-only departments and not paid as much as men. Prejudice was one factor, the article explained. The advertising agency was still overwhelmingly a man’s world. Women in some agencies like JWT may have outnumbered the men; the great majority were clerical and secretarial workers. There were, of course, a number of women who held top agency posts, but Printers’ Ink concluded that they were “unusual”: In 1960 J. Walter Thompson employed 7 women of 132 people as vice presidents. McCann Erickson’s, 6 of 100. Young & Rubicam, 1. Ted Bates, 1 of 45. N. W. Ayer, 1 of 36. And Leo Burnett, none.4
Although Printers’ Ink pointed out, quite rightly, that some of the major agencies had few or no women in higher posts, it vastly understated women’s contributions to the soft goods manufacturers, department stores, mail-order, and public relations field that had been hiring women ad executives for many years. These ad women, who had begun work in the 1920s and 1930s, were now coming up through the ranks, having proved themselves as professionals and carved out a niche in the field. In the late 1940s and 1950s, an increasing number of women came to fill executive posts in these industries. Many of them brought extensive experience in mass marketing and retailing to the agencies, particularly in New York and other major cities, where they began to fill positions formerly held only by men. For example, Phyllis Robinson joined Doyle Dane Bernbach (DDB) as a copywriter in 1949, when the initial staff consisted only of Doyle, the account executive; Dane, who handled administration and finance; and Bob Gage, the art director. Here Robinson wrote award-winning copy for Ohrbach, Chemstrand, Acrilan, and Polaroid. At a time when automotive accounts were traditionally considered men’s work, Robinson also helped the Volkswagen and Avis brands achieve prominence, which brought DDB major national accounts and moved the firm into the ranks of the top-billing agencies in 1965.5
At the major agencies, other notable women included Peggy King, the second female vice president after Ruth Waldo at J. Walter Thompson; Olive Plunkett and Jean Rindlaub, Batten, Barton, Durstine & Osborne (BBDO); Margot Sherman and Dr. Herta Herzog, McCann-Erickson; Mary O’Mears, Young & Rubicam; Reva Fine Korda, Ogilvy, Benson & Mather; Reselou Flanagan, Norman, Craig & Kummel; Beatrice Adams, Gardner Advertising Company; Dorothy Noyes, Noyes & Sproul; Florence W. Goldin, Grey Advertising; Annette Talber, Elizabeth Pike, and Dorothy Whitney, Benton & Bowles; and Bonnie Dewes, D’Arcy Advertising Company. Ad women were strongly, if not unequally, established in the business and impacted the basic promotional appeal for many accounts.6
Who, then, was at fault for women being denied opportunities for filling top posts in the advertising industry? Management was just half of the explanation, argued James M. Woolf, a contributor to Advertising Age, in 1951. Women were also equally responsible, since they should not attempt to sell themselves merely in the art of the “woman’s touch.” On the other hand, management was at fault because it could not forget that women are women, hence they are all-around experts in selling the women’s market. Therefore, women were engaged by agencies and for this very reason they were often not considered when broader opportunities beckoned.7
Still, Woolf neglected to mention that these were the days when many forms of both gender and race discrimination were still legal. If a boss paid a woman less because she was a woman, the boss was unapologetic. If a person did not want to hire a woman for a man’s job, he or she just didn’t. Expressions of discontent with the industry and government’s failure to relieve such racial and social injustice, which had become more noticeable, would dramatically alter the nation, as well as reform advertising in the 1960s and 1970s.
Explosive Growth of Television
Like the medium of radio in the 1930s, the new medium of television provided women with some of the best opportunities during the postwar period. Before the 1950s, television played a small role in American life, and businesses mainly advertised through newspapers, magazines, and radio. In 1946 the nation had fewer than six thousand television sets and only six stations, each of which broadcasted for ten hours a week. But two years later, in 1948, American television began its explosive growth and soon would become the leading medium for advertising.
Television grew more rapidly than radio because the developers of the new medium learned from their early experiences as radio broadcasters. Recognizing that the shoestring operations characteristic of many radio stations were no longer feasible, broadcast developers began to establish networks of affiliated television stations. Initially, the national networks were limited to the big three—CBS, NBC, and ABC. But television usage skyrocketed with the gradual westward expansion of the television networks for various reasons: a drop in the price of sets, increased leisure time, and increased disposable income. As a result, the number of American households with TV went from less than 1 percent in 1946 to 55.7 percent in 1954, and 90 percent by 1962.8
By the mid-1950s though, television became the leading medium for advertising. The advertising firms that adapted most readily to television tripled and quadrupled their annual billings. For example, the Batten, Barton, Durstine, & Osborne (BBDO) agency, an early booster of television, moved 80 percent of its media buys to television, and by 1950, the television department had grown from twelve people to one hundred and fifty. The firm went from billings of $40 million to $235 million in the fifteen-year period from 1945 to 1960.9
Similar to radio, television networks produced shows like Milton Berle, The Ernie Kovacs Show, and The Ed Sullivan Show. Hollywood got into the act when Disney brought out programs like the Mickey Mouse Club and The Wonderful World of Disney. By sponsoring programs, advertisers could control when and how commercials were inserted. For example, Philip Morris cigarettes owned I Love Lucy, General Mills sponsored Betty Crocker’s Star Matinee, and Dutch Masters supported The Ernie Kovacs Show. And market research assessed the programs that drew the most viewers—that is, potential customers— to determine which programs aired. Sponsors hoped that the shows would create good feelings about their products so people would buy them. As long as producers broadcast commercials on radio only, it was generally thought that a voice was all that was needed, no matter what kind of person was behind it. Many sponsors had the idea that a homemaker busy with housework welcomed a male voice in her isolated world. But when it came to television, they found that credibility was tremendously important in a spokesperson. “It’s just not simply convincing for men to be selling some products,” Printers’ Ink explained in 1954. “Credibility demands a woman on household products and other merchandise sold to and largely used by women.”10
The Lady from Westinghouse
One figure that came to symbolize suburbanization and the explosive growth of television in the 1950s was Betty Furness—the Lady from Westinghouse, America’s first full-time product spokeswoman on television (figure 6).
Figure 6. 
Betty Furness, the Lady from Westinghouse, from Printers’ Ink, July 2, 1954.
View full resolution
In 1949, Furness was thirty-three, doing some television acting on the program Studio One, where Westinghouse was the sole sponsor. Someone from the ad agency asked her to try out for a commercial, which paid $150 a week—a considerable sum at the time. On each episode of Studio One, she had to deliver one three-minute commercial and two one-and-half-minute commercials. At the conclusion of each commercial, she looked at the camera and said: “You can be sure it’s Westinghouse.” Consumers found her endorsement credible.
By 1952 Furness had become a celebrity spokesperson of significant proportions who exuded confidence as she handled any appliance and promised that each product made household chores downright easy and even glamorous. Of course, mistakes did happen during live broadcasts (videotape recording had not yet been invented). In a classic 1954 commercial, Furness calmly explained why a new Westinghouse refrigerator was easy to use, all while she was tugging on a refrigerator door whose latch stuck. To all sorts of people, she was simply Betty, a caring friend who had been in their homes and helped them out in the kitchen. And viewers did respond. Over an eleven-year period, the sale of Westinghouse appliances boomed, as Furness promoted the ever-fancier and bigger appliances on television, in print advertisements, and in store displays.11
Yet Furness had a strong sense of her own identity and controlled her image. When the advertising people wanted her to appear more like a housewife, they pressured her to wear a wedding ring, put on an apron, and take an assumed name, which would make her the living Westinghouse logo, like Betty Crocker for General Mills. But she knew exactly how she wanted to represent Westinghouse. Intuitively she knew how to look modern, sophisticated, and upbeat without looking too glamorous. She had to be interesting, too. So she bought her own clothes and constantly changed her appearance, rather than let Westinghouse pay for the wardrobe and decide what she should wear. The advertiser’s theory was that a girl in a pretty dress working the machine would outpull a commercial with a model standing idle. “That party dress did something else,” explained copy chief William E. Pensyl, who wrote washing machine commercials for Furness. “It makes it pretty obvious that you could do a wash without looking like a hag if you had to.”12
After Furness, the perky blonde Julia Meade first appeared for Lincoln automobiles in 1956. Soon she was earning a hundred thousand dollars a year, a sizeable sum at the time, producing convincing spots also for Richard Hudnut hair products and Life magazine, among others. Meade soon became the prototype for other carefully coiffed, wholesome women who sold consumer products with their appearance and flawless enunciation. Anita Bryant, Carmelita Pope, and Florence Henderson also constantly appeared as short, sixty-second reminders of everything the American woman ought to be. As expected, viewers became conditioned to seeing glamorous models and handsome actors in commercials effectively deliver the marketer’s message of product, brand, or company image. By the mid-1950s, though, many spokeswomen were replaced by hundreds of unknown actresses who portrayed the little woman in scenarios believed by the advertising agencies as representative of real-life situations, dramatizing everyday washing machine problems to fighting dirt in any form, reinforcing the traditional stereotype that a woman’s place was in the home. But celebrities continued to reflect their fame on some product brands, such as Dinah Shore for Chevrolet, Polly Bergen for Pepsi, and Ozzie and Harriet Nelson for Coca-Cola.
Yet a fundamental and far-reaching change was taking place: the ideal fifties consumers, Mr. and Mrs. Consumer, or the stereotypical Suburban Dad and Happy Homemaker, portrayed in advertising were in the process of being undermined almost as soon as they appeared. A new kind of “liberated” man and woman appeared in the postwar era and brought a wave of sensuality that heralded a new freedom of sorts for young Americans, while the stereotypical images began to lag behind the times. Women entered the workplace, went to professional schools, fought for social emancipation, got the Pill, and changed their fashions. The idea of the bachelor as an alternative lifestyle also took shape in the 1950s, when Playboy began publishing renderings of state-of-the-art bachelor pads, as unmarried men began paying attention to their homes and spending money on them in ways that only wives used to do.
Gender-Based Marketing: Fashion, Beauty, and Style
The increased importance of gender-based marketing—a term that usually applies to marketing that is directed to women—was not about male versus female during the postwar era. Rather, it was about understanding why a consumer buys, what motivates her to purchase, and how a firm’s customer wanted to use its product. Although it seemed as if every ad embodied sexual symbols from cake mixes to cigarettes, and a charge of desire pervaded everything from lipstick to brassieres in America, of course, this was not the case. In the 1950s though, sexual content and ideas about motivational research were far more visible even in advertising, compared to the previous decades.
The Fifties Woman
Perhaps the single most important discovery about the fifties woman goes back to Alfred Kinsey’s pioneering work, which found a vast difference between what American society believed about sexual behavior and the practices that actually existed in the decade of domesticity. The publication of Sexual Behavior in the Human Male (1948) and Sexual Behavior in the Human Female (1953) quickly reached the top of best seller lists and turned Kinsey into an instant celebrity. Articles about him also appeared in magazines such as Time, Life, Look, and McCall’s. His interviews had shown that at least 80 percent of successful businessmen had extramarital affairs. Of the thousands of women that he interviewed, some 90 percent had participated in petting before marriage, while half stated that they had engaged in premarital intercourse, and a quarter admitted to having extramarital affairs. Those women seemed to indicate the possibility of some sexuality, pleasure, and independence for women in a decade of domesticity. “God,” Kinsey noted, “what a gap between social front and reality!”13
Although Kinsey’s critics furiously disagreed with his figures and above all his failure to condemn what he found, other signs of disobedience, a triumph of sexuality, and a shift away from Puritanism soon appeared in women’s fashion and popular magazines. In a society of strict gender roles, postwar women were expected to emulate the new look inspired by Christian Dior in 1947. It featured long, full skirts with a defined bosom and waist. Not since the Victorian era had women’s fashions been so confining—a girdle molded the body, a “merry widow” corselette cinched the waist, and the conical bra shaped breasts into points. On the big screens of movie houses, all classes of women across America saw portrayals of grand dames and socialites in Dior-inspired fashions, as well as everyday shop girls, secretaries, and housewives with flattering makeup, elegantly coiffed hair, and immaculate, colored nails. By the mid-1950s, however, the look became more sexualized with plunging necklines, bare midriffs, toreador pants, strapless dresses, and tight sheath dresses, in addition to full skirts with cinched waists. Even brassiere and girdle ads of the period became bolder, as they accentuated the form and emphasized women’s sexual allure. The illustrations by pinup artists George Petty and Alberto Vargas for lingerie and swimsuits, once common in men’s magazines like Esquire and Playboy, now appeared in the domestic milieu of women’s magazines and even mainstream daily newspapers (figure 7).
Figure 7. 
Illustrations by pinup artist George Petty, once common in men’s magazines like Esquire and Playboy, now appeared in women’s magazines and even mainstream daily newspapers.
View full resolution
Similar to the fashion trade, this quasi-explicitness also appeared in the editorial material in women’s magazines in the 1950s. Instead of articles devoted only to matters of cooking, decorating, and childcare, the periodicals also counseled on how to keep one’s mate aroused, as evidenced by such sensational titles as: “My Husband Avoids Making Love to Me” (Redbook); “My Husband Wanted Me and the Other Woman, Too. He Needed Us Both!” (Ladies’ Home Journal); and “Sexual Problems of Beautiful Women” (Cosmopolitan). Collectively these articles and fashions seemed to indicate the possibility of some independence for women in a conservative period.14 This pattern of gradual relaxation of attitudes that Kinsey observed also appeared in advertising.
It was during this time that fragrance, lipstick, hair coloring, and brassieres also became tangled up in the sexual revolution, feminism, and self-esteem. Similar to the 1920s and 1930s, these products were part of the package that women bought as they entered the workplace and battled for social emancipation and power. The ads, then as now, for fashion, cosmetics, and beauty promised happiness, more success, more romance, and more lustrous experience, if women would only let beauty and style into their lives. But what fashion and beauty advertising learned was to sell attitude and fantasy in the 1940s and 1950s, shifting from chaste to evocative images with minimal copy and high glamour suggesting an older, more knowing sexuality.
For example, part of the effectiveness of campaigns for Tabu, a perfume by Dana, was in the expectation of beauty, confidence, and sexuality instilled in women as they viewed and read the ads. Just the name Tabu seems to push the envelope, evoking the word taboo. The signature ad for the perfume, which ran for many decades, showed a male violinist lustfully embracing his female piano accompanist, who freely gave into her yearnings, to symbolize the moment when people are swept up in the throes of passion. The captivating ad first ran in 1941 issues of Vogue and Harper’s Bazaar with the tagline “Tabu, the forbidden fragrance by Dana.” In addition to the class magazines, it also appeared throughout other women’s magazines in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s (figure 8).
Figure 8. 
Tabu, the forbidden fragrance by Dana, 1941.
View full resolution
By the late 1940s and early 1950s, ad women boldly embraced what women hoped to get for their beauty dollar by promising better things to come. For cosmetics, copywriter Kay Daly perfected a certain genre of women-centered advertising that did just this, it offered what she called a “little immoral support.” The Revlon company, a world leader in fragrance, beauty, and personal-care products, sold women a chance to be fashionable for the price of a lipstick and matching nail polish. Full-scale color promotions began in 1944, which allowed for total theming of Revlon’s marketing effort, from color spreads placed in the fashion magazines, department stores furnished with window displays, and matching showrooms. But the shade promotion that proved to be one of the most effective ads in cosmetic history was for Revlon’s award-winning “Fire and Ice” campaign in 1952.15
The central idea behind the Revlon campaign played on a psychological interpretation, the duality of women—there was a little bit of bad in every woman. Among the key people within the company and the numerous agency people who developed the campaign, Revlon’s Bea Castle worked with Kay Daly, later vice president and creative director of Norman, Craig & Kummel. They had struggled together to develop names and themes for the color red. But how much can you say about red? As they were talking about what a woman really is, Castle said: “A woman is hot and cold, good or bad, a lady and a tramp … a woman is fire and ice.” Together they wrote the questionnaire, and the creative process unfolded as they presented glamorous American women in a season when Italian movie starlets like Gina Lollobrigida and Sophia Loren first emerged. But Daly insisted that the ads were also intentionally playful, rather than being just an image common in men’s magazines that objectified and demeaned women.16
The first ad in the series promoted the new shade “Fire and Ice” with a two-page spread, featured Richard Avedon’s photograph of a beautiful model in a low-cut, icy, silver-sequined gown with a fiery scarlet cape; and on the facing page, the headline: “Are you made for Fire and Ice?” You were, the copy said, if you could answer “yes” to eight of fifteen questions about heterosexual romance, but also about women’s desire for sensual pleasure, their adventurousness, and their free thinking: “Do you dance with your shoes off? Do you secretly hope that the next man you meet will be a psychiatrist? Would you streak your hair with platinum without consulting your husband?” Since the turn-of-the-century Gibson Girl, women had been “everything nice,” but now there was a new American beauty: “She’s a tease and temptress, siren and gamin, dynamic and demure. … This is the ‘Fire and Ice girl’ (Are you?).” For another new shade of Revlon red lipstick, “Cherries in the Snow,” millions of women read every word of the ad copy like pages from their own diaries. “Who knows the black-lace thoughts you think while shopping in a gingham frock? … Who knows the secret, siren side of you that’s female as a silken cat?” A reclining woman in a red sheath and billowing ermine was not only a promise of better things to come but a dare to make them happen. And so the playful ads ran. Wear it tonight, the ads promised, and anything could happen. These fifties shades of red lipstick—Cherries in the Snow, Fire and Ice, and Love That Red—remain in the Revlon color line (figure 9).17
Figure 9. 
Kay Daly’s campaign for Revlon’s “Queen of Diamonds” lipstick and nail polish combined the appeals of dignity, class, and glamour. Vogue, November 1954.
View full resolution
Hence, confident, sexually charged women appeared in ads for beautifying products for the makeup regimen and marketing beauty. Trust me, these kinds of ads would say, use this product and you will have your heart’s desire. Their advertising also carried a powerful and redemptive message—an immediate and affordable means of transformation. You could be whatever you want to be, from the good girl to the bad girl, a lady or a vamp. Similar to Kay Daly, Mary Fillius for Maidenform brassieres and Shirley Polykoff for Clairol hair also captured the female sensibilities of the day. “To be socially attractive, to be attractive, and to win a husband, to keep a husband, a women had to look sexy, free, and available,” wrote historian Carol Hymowitz of the new woman.18
Mary Fillius: Maidenform “I Dreamed”
Similar to the Revlon ads, theMaidenform campaign brought a sexual playfulness to woman-to-woman advertising. The print advertisements, which pictured Maidenform brassieres, stressed the fit, comfort, and shaped the advantages that the product could make in a woman’s appearance and confidence. But the images also showed a glamorous woman in control of her environment, and an altogether different woman behind her social or professional veneer ran for decades. They first appeared as half-page, black-and-white ads in women’s magazines, but within one year, full-page, four-color ads appeared and ran for decades.
Starting in 1949, a tastefully bejeweled, barefoot young woman floats through a surreal sketch of a grocery store on a serious shopping spree. As she arches her back and lifts her arms, however, she exposes her bare midriff and reveals the Maidenform “Alloette” brassiere. The reader is brought into the fantasy: “Asleep … but it all seemed so real. Leafing through lettuce, browsing through broccoli … all eyes gave my figure a big ‘aye’ … And all because of my Maidenform brassiere.” Although the theme of shopping may have been a natural one for women’s roles, such a fantasy ad was daring in 1949. But the agency had no problem placing the ad, except in the New Yorker, which wanted to censor every ad.19
The dream theme had been created by copywriter Mary Fillius, a Smith College graduate and one of Bernice Fitz-Gibbon’s trainees at Gimbels. While working at the Norman, Craig, & Kummel agency, Fillius first presented the idea to a lingerie house, which turned it down. The agency then brought it to Maidenform, which came to use the theme. Throughout the 1950s, ad women Mary Fillius, Kay Daly, and Kitty D’Alessio would think of themes and write them on three-by-five-inch cards, narrow them down to four or five ideas, and then determine how to produce the concepts before making their presentation to the company. Each “I dreamed” theme had to connect with the audience, pitch to the current fashions, and adapt to the particular line that Maidenform was producing. The final decision on the themes was determined in conferences with Ida Rosenthal, the founder of Maidenform, her daughter Beatrice Coleman, vice president in charge of design, and the advertising agency.20
For more than twenty years, the Maidenform Woman appeared in everyday and fantastic situations, such as drifting in a hot air balloon, propelled in a roller coaster, and floating over the crowds at the opera, stressing freedom of movement in the company’s undergarments. Despite the stay-at-home mom image popular on television, the scantily clad Maidenform model also appeared working outside the home not only as a student, artist, and dress designer, but also as a firefighter, cowboy, railroad engineer, police officer, lawyer, and a boxer (figure 10).
Figure 10. 
The “I dreamed” theme for Maidenform was based on what motivation research later concluded was women’s conscious or unconscious exhibitionist tendencies.
View full resolution
The Maidenform Woman even turned up on a barge down the Nile, in medieval times; later in the 1960s, she appeared in Europe on a Paris rooftop, in a castle in Spain, and in a gondola in Venice. Long committed to print, the campaign appeared in magazines with newspapers secondarily. The ads appeared in Vogue, Bazaar, Glamour, and Mademoiselle, and even a teenage campaign for Seventeen. But Maidenform drew the line with television. With men and children as viewers, they deemed the medium as not appropriate. The Maidenform campaign was fun in women’s magazines but bad taste on television; acceptable for women but not for men and children; lovely on the dance floor but not in a nightclub. Thus, delineating appropriate images based on medium, time of day, activity, age, and circumstances had become crucial to drawing the fine line between propriety and a projection of a sexual being.21
Every Maidenform model had to meet certain strict standards, instructed the advertiser. She was to be “healthy, unmarried, twenty-six, and more fulsome than a 34-B cup,” which was the average size of the Maidenform consumer in 1961. Maidenform girls dreamed in white bras, because most women wanted their bras white, unlike men, who preferred them to be black. But here again the key was the art direction that made photos more comic than erotic and that were shot in high contrast by such well-known photographers as Richard Avedon, Irving Penn, and others. “We tried to inject fashion as well as some humor, so that the ad would be fun,” recalled Kitty D’Alessio. “People looked for them because they were campy … people thought about them, remembered them, and looked for the next one.”22
Ultimately, Maidenform paid little attention to the reaction of some dismayed women readers and kept on running the campaign. Research found that women readers were twice as likely to read and remember a specific Maidenform ad than an ad of any competitor. The campaign had struck a chord with women. One explanation for this came from motivational research that suggested that any woman is basically a born exhibitionist, desiring to look more appealing— and, sometimes, sexy—to the interested observer. In a dream or fantasy, of course, women readers can safely act out their innermost desires to appear scantily clad or undressed to a make-believe audience and arouse a man’s emotions. Dreaming also played an important role in the 1950s. “Whether it was a dream house, Dream Whip, dream kitchen, dream cake, or ‘Dream Lover,’ the opulence and technology of the decade optimistically suggested that many of these dreams could come true,” explains Barbara J. Coleman.23
When Maidenform began offering cash prizes of up to $20,000 for other original dream sequences in 1955, the public helped articulate what was, in effect, a collective fantasy that allegedly spoke to the repressed needs of middle-class American women. In 1957 the first prize for this effort was “I dreamed I danced the hornpipe with Sinbad the Sailor in my Maidenform bra”; the second: “I dreamed I was a silhouette until I was spotlighted in my Maidenform bra”; and the third: “I dreamed I played the violin at Carnegie Hall without strain in my Maidenform bra.” The contest aside, entrants also submitted a twenty-five-word essay on why they liked their Maidenform bra and proof of purchase of their product. Women readers participated in this fantasy by imagining that they, too, were confident and attractive enough—sexual enough—to appear in public exhibiting their own Maidenform bras. They even sent scores of unsolicited photos of themselves in endless I dreamed scenes in their Maidenform bras. Thus the Maidenform Dream campaign uplifted not only the female anatomy but also her spirit. When the ads no longer appealed to younger women, the fantasy theme was dropped in 1969, as more women opted to pursue careers and make their dreams a reality.24
Shirley Polykoff: Clairol “Does She … or Doesn’t She?”
As the lone female copywriter at the Foote, Cone & Belding advertising agency, Shirley Polykoff had another take on how to portray the modern woman (figure 11).
Figure 11. 
Shirley Polykoff. Photo from American Advertising Federation Hall of Fame.
View full resolution
When she took over the new Clairol account in 1955, few American women dyed their hair. At the time, women who colored their hair were mainly models, actresses, and members of elite café society.
To make hair coloring popular in mainstream America, Polykoff made it clear that respectable women colored their hair. So she insisted that models in the Clairol ads resemble the girl next door, who’s a little prettier, wears cashmere sweaters, and lives in a slightly nicer house than yours, instead of glamorous women. The print ads also included a child with the mother to make it clear that suburban, tastefully dressed matrons were using Clairol, not just “fast women” or glamorous actresses (figure 12). The copy was friendly, soft with caring overtones, as if two women were having a conversation, talking about a third woman whom they both knew—the woman featured in the ad. In the middle of the conversation, the copy would switch to the topic of the reader’s own hair and how Clairol could improve her looks and outlook. Almost overnight her slogan “Does She or Doesn’t She” caught on, and soon dyed hair became fashionable. Despite the fact that male executives at Life magazine turned down a ten-page Clairol layout, the ad theme ran for the next eighteen years until Polykoff retired from FCB, and the number of American women coloring their hair jumped from 7 percent to more than 40 percent.25
Figure 12. 
Shirley Polykoff promoted Clairol hair color as an immediate and affordable means of personal transformation.
View full resolution
Similar to selling cosmetics, Polykoff promoted hair coloring to women as a way not only to change their appearance and boost their morale, but also to continually experiment with, and renew, their looks. As in most hair color ads, there was the message to women that you look younger when you eliminate that gray hair. For Clairol Loving Care, a nonpermanent color designed to cover gray hair, the campaign ran with the slogan, “Hate that gray? Wash it away,” as well as the tagline “Makes your husband feel younger too, just to look at you!” But it was Polykoff’s promotion of the Lady Clairol cream-and-bleach combination that brought silver and platinum shades to Middle America: “Is It True Blondes Have More Fun?” and “If I’ve Only One Life to Live, Let Me Live It as a Blonde.” With her ads, Polykoff had created something iconic about not only blondes but also redheads: “Every woman should be a redhead … at least once in her life.” Thus, Polykoff’s ads for Clairol transformed women’s views on hair dye. They gave women the license to think of hair coloring as they think of lipstick, one shade one day, and another shade the next.
Polykoff knew firsthand about how hair color provided an immediate and affordable means of transformation. As with many other women of her era, it appears she was caught up in the first stirrings of feminism—to pass as one thing, when deep inside you were something else. Born Shirley Polykoff, she was the daughter of Russian Jewish immigrants living in Brooklyn who had come to America with only a few items. She also knew the value of appearance. As a child growing up in Brooklyn, she dreamed of crossing the bridge to Manhattan, and her values were shaped by the advertisements in glossy magazines. When Polykoff was fifteen, she began to lighten her hair, turning herself into the kind of person that she believed did not go with brown hair. “If you asked my mother, ‘Are you proud to be Jewish?’ She wasn’t trying to pass,” says Polykoff’s daughter, Alix Nelson Frick. “But she believed in the dream, and the dream was you could acquire all the accoutrements of the established affluent class, which included a certain breeding and a certain kind of look.” It was this image of the kind of woman that Polykoff thought she ought to be that was embodied in her Clairol advertisements. “My mother wanted to be that woman in the picture,” Frick continued. “She was wedded to the notion that a suburban, tastefully dressed, well-coddled matron was an adornment to her husband, a loving mother, a long-suffering wife, a person who never overshadowed him.”26
Yet “Shirley Polykoff wasn’t really that kind of woman,” writer Malcolm Gladwell points out. “She always had a career. She never moved to the suburbs.” And she was a very flamboyant, very dominating type who had brilliantly succeeded in a man’s world.27
Starting at Harper’s Bazaar, Polykoff began work as a secretary to the circulation manager, making twenty-three dollars a week during the Depression. When she stepped in to write a Harper’s advertisement for Good Housekeeping magazine, which would not run the ad unless they received the copy that day, she inadvertently misspelled several authors’ names that appeared in the ad. Rather than being praised for her initiative, she was fired. To find a new job, she created a portfolio and made the rounds, showing her book to the advertising departments of large retail stores. Soon she established herself in retail advertising, first for department and variety stores, including Bamberger’s and Kresge’s in Newark, then for various New York agencies with retail accounts. However, Polykoff’s first agency job came with Peck Advertising, where she worked for ten years until eventually moving on to a smaller agency that specialized in retail and manufactured shoe brands. With twenty years of advertising experience, Polykoff next moved to Foote, Cone & Belding in 1955. As the agency’s only woman copywriter, she brought the feminine viewpoint to her work on Playtex women’s foundation garments, the Perfume Institute, and Savarin Coffee accounts.28
Another way Polykoff resolved the contradiction between the kind of woman she was and the kind she felt she ought to be was through a kind of useful fiction. At the age of twenty-five, she married George P. Halperin, the son of an Orthodox rabbi, with whom she later had two children. But she kept her maiden name at the office, since she had already established a reputation, though she used Polly (a short version of Polykoff) Halperin at home. One of the stories Polykoff told was that she put her husband and family above her career, going so far as to limit her Foote, Cone & Belding salary to $25,000 so as not to earn more than her husband. After he died, the agency raised her salary to be commensurate with her position and promoted her to a vice president of the agency, but that was also part of her legend. After eighteen years at Foote, Cone & Belding, Polykoff retired in 1973 as senior vice president, and ten years later in 1983, she was elected to the Advertising Hall of Fame.29
Certainly Polykoff, Fillius, and Daly succeeded in making other women feel that hair coloring, lingerie, makeup, and fragrance were an essential part of the package for women to maintain their self-confidence and identity. Such rebelliousness in beauty campaigns continued well into the following decade, giving the impression of an increasing freedom of sexual expression for women.
Gender-Based Marketing: Automobiles
In 1956 Fortune magazine published some unexpected facts about women’s place in American economic society in an article titled “You Can Only Estimate the Power of a Woman.” Recent market research had found that women had far more purchasing power than estimated: more than twenty million women were employed, about one-third of the workforce. Women bought 90 percent of all household purchases, 62 percent of all hardware, and 89 percent of home remodeling. They held 65 percent of all savings accounts, and accounted for 62 percent of individual stockholders of large corporations. Women also purchased or influenced the acquisition of most automobiles. Finally, women not only outnumbered men, they also outlived them. Thus, Fortune concluded, “Who said this was a man’s world?”30
To key industries like the automotive industry, women represented the largest, most powerful market in the world. Wartime pushed millions of women to take up driving for the service of the nation. Suburbanization also made public transportation inconvenient; mothers raising children in bedroom communities had to get around and so took on the role as family chauffer. Considering that nearly twenty million American women drove cars, and some eight million of them were part of two-car families, the time had long passed when the automobile belonged exclusively to the man of the house. In the postwar years, the emergence of a new generation of suburban homemakers presented an unprecedented opportunity for car manufacturers.31
Automobiles offered the suburban woman more than a means of transport and independence; they also suggested a lifestyle. They provided a visible statement not only about a woman’s status but also her sexuality and sexual identity. The concept of a car as a status symbol had long been a central theme of General Motors’ marketing strategy, suggesting that when you arrived, you bought a Cadillac. In turn, consumers used the vehicles not only for transportation but also to create identities; cars represented people’s ideas about themselves to others in a society in which looks, display, and goods are pervasive and inescapable. As consumerism rose to new heights in the 1950s, Ford Motor Company, Chrysler, and General Motors dramatically shifted the concept of many automobile models from a masculine theme—more power and performance—to a household appliance with fashion, color, and style.
The hiring of women industrial designers largely known for their feminine sensibilities in the 1940s and 1950s coincided with these broad changes in the automotive market. Through female designers and other cultural mediators, the automotive industry came to understand what mattered most to Mrs. Consumer. She wanted to know what it would take to make things for her easier, quicker. To her, color harmony in cars had become as important as body styling and engineering. That brought about brighter colors, trim lines, and upholstery that was more pleasing to the eye and stayed clean longer. Changes in windshields, luggage space, seat adjustments, power steering, power brakes, and power windows also came about, as did station wagons, because automakers had their eye on the women’s market. In addition, the steering wheel was lowered, and door buttons and armrests were even redesigned so they wouldn’t break women’s fingernails. Today the car-buying public not only accepts these improvements and annual model changes, but also has come to demand them.32
In these early days of gender-based marketing, marketers and advertisers often missed their mark. “Marketing to women should be transparent, not pink. Companies who want to reach women need to really show that they’re sensitive to the needs of this market and that they’re taking it seriously,” explains Martha Barletta, president of the TrendSight Group. “Because if they think that it’s all about décor and all they need to do was paint their brand pink, that will backfire on them 99 out of a hundred times.”33
Many of them did just this. They not only painted the brand pink, some automakers even went to the extremes of gender typing, painting the product itself pink. For example, Chrysler Corporation introduced the 1954 Le Comte and La Comtesse—the former bronze and black, the latter pink and pale gray—his and hers show cars. The following year, Chrysler produced a fun, high-end model for the fine ladies of the day—the Dodge La Femme in 1954 and 1955. It symbolized Detroit automakers’ idea of femininity with two-tone exteriors painted in Heather Rose and Sapphire White or a lavender and white option. Furthermore, they designed the model to be a conversation piece aimed at the wives of doctors and bank managers who would drive it around town, in an era when most families had just one car. But the crowning touches were its feminine accessories with compartments to stow a woman’s essentials, including a matching rose-colored leather shoulder bag to hold a cigarette case, lighter, and a compact and lipstick case. The 1955 model also featured a seat cloth with little rosebuds and a rain ensemble with folding umbrella to match. The dealer brochure heralded the new model: “Never a car more distinctly feminine than La Femme, the first fine car created exclusively for women!” Chrysler produced only one thousand models; the demand for the model never justified mass production.34
During this period, Harley Earl, General Motors’ vice president of the styling division, actively recruited women designers, and they became known as the “Damsels of Designs,” often participating in company promotions, television appearances, and public lectures. General Motors had hoped the women designers would bring a distinctly feminine approach to automotive design rather than a masculine stamp. Although the opulent Cadillac model appeared to belong exclusively to the man of the house, the women designers fashioned the Cadillac Eldorado, the Seville Baroness, and a series of other less expensive models to appeal to the modern woman, such as the Chevrolet Impala Martinique. They also introduced slipcovers to change with the seasons, chic color combinations to match dresses, luggage to match the interior, and removable cosmetics cases. Women-oriented ads reinforced the theme with women in evening gowns and female interest situations, such as a mink stole and a box of orchids dropped on the backseat.35
When GM showcased its new 1959 Cadillac, the strategy was an obvious attempt to convey luxury, success, and femininity. The new model came in a choice of feminine colors: classic white, powder blue, and, of course, chic pink. A series of ads featured scenes with a mother and daughter wearing coordinating dresses that matched with the shade of the automobile. In one early ad for the pink Cadillac, the text opened with “One of the special delights which ladies find in Cadillac ownership is the pleasure of being a passenger.” Dangerously approaching condescension, the ad addresses the prospective woman consumer as a passenger or subordinate rather than as a driver taking control of the wheel of a luxury car. To cosmetic entrepreneur Mary Kay Ash, however, the new pink Cadillac was highly valuable for a very different reason. Since she gloried in selling femininity, she promoted the pink Cadillac as a sales incentive to consultants and sales directors who reached and maintained their sales goal achieved from selling Mary Kay Cosmetics at home parties. Today, the car incentive program continues with an expanded fleet, but the pink Cadillac remains the highest honor.
Today, the debate over gendered marketing veers between the poles of stereotyping to self-invention. Gender-based marketing remains a risky undertaking for most companies. Get it wrong, and their audience would be offended. Miss the mark, and their audience would ignore them. Either way, they were looking at a very costly effort, when the general revival of feminism would strongly admonish the advertising business for never quite catching up with the times.
Representations of Ad Men and Women
Achieving the American Dream became inextricably linked with business success after World War II, as an increasingly affluent America learned to define the middle class through possessions, status, and lifestyle. Not surprisingly, best-selling novels and popular films in the postwar era reflected the country’s fears of increasing materialism and the promotion industry’s expanding impact. Bestselling novels like Please Send Me Absolutely Free (1946), The Hucksters (1946), and Aurora Dawn (1947) portrayed the ad man as a soulless antihero. The Space Merchants (1952) took place in the future and went so far as to portray a time when advertising agencies literally ruled the world. In the United States, senators and congressmen were elected not by the people but by corporations controlled by the advertising agencies, and each representative had voting power in proportion to the annual billings of his group.
The popularity of advertising men as heroes, or antiheros, of American life alerted Hollywood to the rich potential such a subject had for major films. Similar to the novels, popular films also perpetuated long-held stereotypes about the ad man as crass, materialistic, deceptive, and interested only in appearances. “They were said to dress more stylishly than the mere businessmen they served. They lived somewhat unconventional even racy lives and were supposedly torn between guarding the public good and using their great gifts to manipulate people for profit,” observes David Halberstam. “In effect, it was seen to be a profession where young men traded their ideals for an even higher life-style, with luxurious suburban homes in Greenwich and Darien.”36
By and large, however, ad women in popular films were portrayed in narrow roles, working behind the scenes in several ways: (1) beauties living a more conventional life guarding the public good or the good of the family, or (2) the voluptuous, earthy model showing off her body. For example, the film version of Frederic Wakeman’s novel The Hucksters features a scene in which the virtuous Deborah Kerr tells Clark Gable that he does not have to sell out, rather, he can be an honorable man in advertising: “Why don’t you be one of those who sells only what he believes in? Sell good things, things that people should have, and sell them with dignity—and taste. That’s a career for any man, a career to be proud of.”
Other films of this genre include the 1947 film Her Husband’s Affairs, in which Lucille Ball plays the enterprising wife of an advertising executive played by Franchot Tone. Though the ad man is successful, his wife can’t help but feel that he would be more successful if she were to take an active part in his business affairs. In another not so subtle swipe at radio and television advertising, the 1950 film Pretty Baby features Betty Drake as an enterprising young woman who always ensures herself a seat on the subway by carrying a doll wrapped in baby bunting. Through a series of complications, Drake’s bosses, advertising executives Dennis Morgan and Zachary Scott, assume the baby is genuine and hope to use the little darling to win a baby food account. And in the 1957 film Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter? based on a successful Broadway play, ad man Tony Randall hopes to convince blonde bombshell Jayne Mansfield to endorse his product, Stay-Put Lipstick. It pokes fun at everything from advertising, consumerism, and celebrity to sexual mores and success mentality.
When a film portrayed a woman as an advertising executive, typically she was struggling with her career and unfulfilled, as seen in two fluffy comedies, both starring Doris Day. In Lover Come Back (1961), the plot revolves around sleazy ad man Rock Hudson, who advertises a nonexistent product called “VIP” just to feature his girlfriend in TV commercials. Meanwhile, rival advertising agent Doris is trying to get the same account with true professionalism. It is not about Doris protecting her virginity from Rock, rather, it is about Doris protecting her autonomy, which makes her an early feminist, as some critics have noted. And in The Thrill of It All (1963), housewife Beverly Boyer (Day) happens by chance to impress Rock Hudson with an honest appraisal of one his products, Happy Soap. Working as the new spokesperson for the soap, Beverly becomes an advertising sensation, but her husband has to deal with the social consequences of his wife making more money than he does and how her new career infringes on her duties as a housewife. As this film demonstrates, the main character’s career disrupts her private life and the prevailing ideal that a woman’s place is in the home.
Thus, advertising is represented as a white-collar profession for men, where traditional family-oriented women are shown in a comedic way trying to make a career of it. Nonetheless, these films also reflect the increasingly active role of middle-class women, including the confusion about the impact of an advertising career on romance, marriage, and sexual propriety. Although the films tried to warn young women of the pitfalls of careerism, they expressed this era’s growing anxiety over sexual imagery, explains film historian Jack Boozer. Ultimately, “the American sex revolution that began by the late 1960s was predicated in part on the very prominence over the last ten years of the sexual appeals imposed by modern advertising.”37
Juliann Sivulka  
Juliann Sivulka is the author of Stronger Than Dirt: A Cultural History of Advertising Personal Hygiene in America, 1890 to 1940 and Soap, Sex, and Cigarettes: A Cultural History of American Advertising. She lives in Tokyo, Japan, where she is a professor of advertising and American studies at the School of International Liberal Studies of Waseda University.

Footnotes
1.  “You Can Only Estimate the Power of a Woman,” Fortune, August 1956.

2.  Obituary of Jean Wade Rindlaub, New York Times, December 22, 1991.

3.  Angel Kwolek-Folland, Incorporating Women: A History of Women in Business in the United States (New York: Palgrave, 2002), p. 157.

4.  “Women Veeps at McCann,” Printers’ Ink, February 26, 1960.

5.  Ed Applegate, ed., Ad Men and Women: A Biographical Dictionary of Advertising (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1994), pp. 273–78.

6.  “Advertising Power That Can’t Be Skirted,” New York Times, February 22, 1959. Also see Stephen Fox, The Mirror Makers (New York: Vintage Books, 1984), pp. 292–94.

7.  James M. Woolf, “Is It True That Women Are Denied the Bigger Opportunities in Advertising?” Advertising Age, December 17, 1951.

8.  Erik Barnouw, Tube of Plenty: The Evolution of American Television (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990).

9.  “TV Arrives and the Future Begins,” Advertising Age, July 31, 1995. On BBDO, see Martin Mayer, Madison Avenue, USA (New York: Harper, 1954), p. 11. On the history of early TV commercials, see Jonathan Price, The Best Thing on TV: Commercials (New York: Viking Press, 1978).

10.  “Are the Gals Taking Over Radio-TV Commercials?” Printers’ Ink, July 2, 1954.

11.  David Halberstam, The Fifties (New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1993), pp. 496–99.

12.  “Ah, There Mrs. O’Rourke,” Printers’ Ink, June 26, 1953.

13.  Cornelia V. Christenson, Kinsey: A Biography (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1971), pp. 117–18.

14.  Ivor Williams, “Pious Pornography,” Playboy, October 1957.

15.  Andrew Tobias, “Fire and Ice and Everything Nice,” in Fire and Ice: The Story of Charles Revson—The Man Who Built the Revlon Empire (New York: William and Morrow Company, 1976).

16.  Ibid., p. 292.

17.  Ibid., chap. 8.

18.  Carol Hymowitz and Michele Weissman, A History of Women in America (New York: Bantam Books, 1978), p. 292.

19.  Barbara J. Coleman, “Maidenform (ed): Images of American Women in the 1950s,” Genders 21 (1995).

20.  Bernice Fitz-Gibbon, Macy’s, Gimbels, and Me (1951; repr., New York: Simon and Schuster, 1967), p. 264. Interview with Kitty D’Alessio, August 3, 1990. Maidenform Collection, box 1, folder 21, American History Archives. Also see “Maidenform’s J. A. Coleman,” Madison Avenue, November 1960, Maidenform Collection, box 1, folder 6, American History Archives, Smithsonian Institution.

21.  On censorship, see “Maidenform’s Dream Marks Its 20th Year,” Women’s Wear Daily, March 20, 1969. After Maidenform moved away from the “I Dreamed” theme, the advertisers began in-depth television advertising in 1972. Company publication, Maidenform, the Golden Dream 1922–1972, Maidenform Collection, box 1, folder 12, American History Archives. “Maidenform’s J. A. Coleman,” Madison Avenue (November 1960).

22.  On standards, see Maidenform, the Golden Dream 1922–1972. See also Interview, Kitty D’Alessio.

23.  In 1962 Gallup and Robinson research found that twenty-nine out of one hundred women readers recalled a particular Maidenform ad in 1952. See “Maidenform’s 40th Birthday,” Maidenform Mirror, July–August 1962, Maidenform Collection, box 1, folder 12, American History Archives, Smithsonian Institution. “Maidenform Dreams Big,” Sales Management, April 5, 1963, p. 11. On dreaming, see Coleman, “Maidenform (ed).”

24.  “Latest Press Reaction to the Dream Contest,” Maidenform Collection, box 1, folder 12, American History Archives, Smithsonian Institution.

25.  Shirley Polykoff, Does She … Or Doesn’t She? And How She Did It (New York: Doubleday, 1975).

26.  “Polykoff Put Herself in User’s Shoes,” Advertising Age, October 14, 1985. On Frick, see Malcolm Gladwell, “Annals of Advertising: True Colors,” New Yorker, March 22, 1999, pp. 70–73.

27.  Gladwell, “Annals of Advertising.”

28.  Robert M. Thomas Jr., “Shirley Polykoff, 90, Ad Writers Whose Query Colored a Nation,” New York Times, June 8, 1998.

29.  “Polykoff, Shirley,” Encyclopedia of Advertising (Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, 2003).

30.  “You Can Only Estimate the Power of a Woman,” Fortune, August 1956.

31.  “Sell a Woman, Sell Her Family,” Printers’ Ink, July 5, 1957.

32.  On women automotive designers, see Pat Kirkham, ed., Women Designers in the USA 1900–2000 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000), pp. 281–82.

33.  “What Women Want,” CMA Management, December/January 2006, http://www.managementmag.com/index.cfm/ci_id/1165la_id/1 (accessed July 10, 2006).

34.  Internet site provides historical information on Dodge La Femme, including how to tell if you own a La Femme, restoration, and worldwide registry, http://www.dodgelafemme.com/info.htm (accessed December 23, 2007).

35.  Kirkham, ed., Women Designers, pp. 281–82.

36.  Halberstam, The Fifties, p. 501.

37.  Jack Boozer, Career Movies: American Business and the Success Mystique (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2003), p. 178.

Source
From Ad Women: How They Impact What We Need, Want, and Buy by Juliann Sivulka (Prometheus Books, 2008). Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Copyright © 2008 The Advertising Educational Foundation, Inc
Advertising & Society Review
Volume 9, Issue 4, 2008

Research Areas
Social Sciences > Business and Society
Recommend
Email a link to this page
  
View Citation
Save Citation
Subject Headings
Women in marketing -- United States -- History -- 20th century.
Women in the advertising industry -- United States -- History -- 20th century.
Related Content
A Shift in Fundamentals: The Changing Direction in Logistics and Transportation Management 
A Shift in Fundamentals: The Changing Direction in Logistics and Transportation Management 
<i>A Handbook of Transport Economics</i> ed. by Andre de Palma et al. (review) 
A Handbook of Transport Economics ed. by Andre de Palma et al. (review) 
Advancing Singapore-China Economic Relations 
Advancing Singapore-China Economic Relations 
You have access to this content
Free sample
Open Access
Restricted Access
Welcome to Project MUSE

Use the Search box at the top of the page to find book and journal content. Refine results with the filtering options on the left side of the results page. Use the Browse box to browse a selection of books and journals.

Connect with Project MUSE

Join our Facebook Page
Follow us on Twitter
Project MUSE | 2715 North Charles Street | Baltimore, Maryland USA 21218 | (410) 516-6989 | About | Contact | Help | Tools | Order

©2014 Project MUSE. Produced by The Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Milton S. Eisenhower Library.