see also scan (includes group members)
Appendix 2-6 = p48-69
Descriptions labelling advertising = p12
info required = p14 (MAFF,, see appendix 1)
research into v long term effects p18
p19
we there fore recommend that when a licence is issued for a pesticide or veteran product either containing new active...ingredients/new use licence should be subject to review after 3 yrs
p20
... should be incorporated into the new mandatory scheme. We do not believe it possible to lay down hard and fast rules
p21 ref rpublishing info HMSO 1964
p22
(93) of schedule 5 of the poisons rules
p23
(98) acreages. These records must include the number of hours for which maxima are given
p24
(101) working on farms. the use of hydrogen cyanide in food storage is covered by regulations made under the hydrogen cyanide fumigation act. 
p25
(104) * research study group hmos 1961
p26
(110)
which had been contaminated by pesticide product. Cases of farm to animals which have grazed on or in the vicinity


p27
some of these problems can be dealt with by commonsense, care and education. [trespassing, passersby eating contaminated wild fruits]

p30
standard range offered by container manufacturers for many uses apart from holding pesticide and ve protects. The size rang is from 40/45 gallons down to about 2 oz. Most widely available sizes for commercial users at 1 and 5 gal for liquid products and 28 and 56 lb for solid products. In the domestic and home garden range the popular size is 8oz for both solid and liquid packs. No clear separation in size range exists however between these two types of users. 

requirements of poisons rules in relation to containers - vertical fluting - discourage mfcr from using newer materials and techniques of fabrication which might lead to safer containers for regulated pest and vet products. (recommend that definition of container be reviewed)

containers, cartons and boxes should meet a number of requirements.
resistance to corrosion (contents and env)
resistance to damage during handling
leak free
easy stacking
secure grip in one of both hands
readily and completely emptied without leaving inoperable mamounts
design to ensure pouring without splashing and allow container to be conveniently and completely washed out
closure remains leakproof after replacement
means for safe release of pressure 

p31
destroy empty containers after washing out through burning or flattening and burying

or return containers to distributors but little incentive to do so 

disposal of residual diluted products or unused concentrated products - 
p32
apparently horticulturist accumulate them as pests become resistant, research how much of a problem this is
researching whether chemicals can be mixed with others to deactivate them and allow disposal without contamination