Advertising for Cooperative societies
HW Atkins
1933
Leicester cooperative printing society ltd
leicester london kettering 

p11
preparing the press ad
1) must attract
2) must be believed
3) must present the buyer's and not the seller's viewpoint

[however nothing about understanding the user/consumer/audience has been mentioned so far, other than the use of newspaper space accounting for the class of public. 

p19 
shows example of Silvo

which is advertised as Swift and safe. No acid, no mercury
[which I haven't seen before]

p32
type of copy for co-operators
it is not very long since the "coop shop" was the poor man's store. Rapid strides in shifting, service and uplift in that general standard of goods sold have enlisted into the ranks of the cooke movement a great number of people in comfortable circumstances. It is not uncommon to see women drive up to the coop store in their won motor cars, while the number of members who order goods by telephone and the increase in avg hare capital all show the extent to which the moment is spreading into the middle class section of the community. The copy writer must know this and draft his ad accordingly. 
preserve a balance which will not be over the heads of some member, yet appear plebeian to others. Societies covering a large are can solve the problem by localising their ads. 
Frank, honest statement of fact should be a characterisation of every ad but members of coop socks have a double right to it. They are the shareholders in the business, they ARE the business and their interests must always be the foundation of the advertising policy. 

p110
preparing a salse cmapign
research - 
who are the customers
is the product a luxury or an economy?
is it to replace something that is already on the market? 
how do the price and quality compare with competitive lines of the same kind?
p111
without an intelligent market survey the advertiser is unable to determine the size of the appropriateoin that should be set aside for advertising and the campaign starts on the wrong notes an ind such circumstances would probably end at a much higher figure of expenditure than is justified. 
p118
selling to staff
the keen ad manager will leave no stone unturned in order to promote sales. He will not forget that the societies's employees are responsible buyers of the goods he's advertising. It has been found on numerous occasions that a personal letter to every person on the society's payroll together with a piece of ad matter is productive of good results and often in such cases where a sale is not made directly to an employee it is the means of wider publicity among his friends. ... Moderation - the constant receipt of such communications would ultimately creat the impression that they were being exploited rather than given a special opportunity 