Alchemy and Chemistry in Sickness and in Health

Home Chemicals and Health Hazards
Topics may address the intentional use of alchemy and chemistry for purposes relating to health or the
unintended side-effects of their employment **in this area**
health of individuals/ society
chemistry - industry, molecules themselves?
unintended effects - vulnerability of children, propagation of misuses, home effects on wider environments
education  - RoSPA
media
contamination - threats  feedback loop with media

historical attitudes on relationship between chemistry and health
relationship between industry and user?
(lack of ) knowledge of laboratory chemistry
immediate vs future effects

In this presentation, I take a view of chemistry or perhaps the products of chemistry, being used to maintain twentieth century health through domestic cleaning. The most obvious unintended effects are acute poisonings, but chemicals used to keep the home clean are also implicated in longer term unintended effects on both the individual and society in terms of environmental effects but also changes in which chemicals continued to be available and how they were presented to users. 

By looking at the product options available to be used in everyday practices of people who are not necessarily chemists or other scientific professionals, I widen the discussion about engagement with chemistry beyond organised experiences of bangs and flashes. Even if chemistry is understood to be about reactions, people undoubtedly use chemistry and its reactions in their homes to kill microbes, to neutralise or mask unpleasant odours, to remove stains and lift dirt.  They use chemistry even if they do not care about  or understand the chemical details of the reaction. They might not use a beaker to make up a solution, instead they use a toilet bowl, a bucket, a teacup. They won't use a standard measuring system, they will use lumps described in relation to everyday objects, glugs, squirts, sprinkles facilitated by the chemical's container, judging by eye and nose what seems right to their particular situation. Reactions take place on kitchen work surfaces, sides of baths, on carpets, upholstery, garments and accessories. These reactions have rarely been explained to the user and they might not even have been able to find out what chemicals they were using simply by looking at the packet. This has potentially serious consequences when users experiment and mix products, making them "stronger" indicated by the evolution of chlorine, a smell associated with effective cleaning but also a gas which can overcome and poison people. Fumes and smells of chemical cleaning products has been a theme running through my research, the idea that if you can smell something the chemical is already in you and acting on you is strongly associated with cleanliness and health. Warnings are necessarily terse, the packaging they are on is of limited size and most users are put off by spending time reading folded out small print, but short warnings can become obtuse or neutered by the absence of spelled out consequences. Not everyone is or even wants to be equipped with the chemical education or worldly knowledge that enables them to fill in these gaps, and certainly children who are only just beginning to acquire such understanding are more vulnerable to household chemicals.  Anatomical museums 
