
	
ADVERTISING & SOCIETY REVIEW
E-ISSN 1154-7311
CONTENTS
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/v008/8.4kortti.html

On the Cusp of Postwar Modernization: Americanization, International Culture, and Gender Roles in Finnish Commercials, 1955–1975

Jukka Kortti

Abstract:

This article uses selections chosen from a large sample of Finnish commercials produced in the period 1955 to 1975 to demonstrate the changes, particularly in the representation of gender roles, that resulted from the rapid modernization experienced by postwar Finland. The selection includes ads for appliances, household products, toiletries, and cosmetics. Though forces normally seen as “Americanization,” especially in the form of advertising and consumption influences, are discernable, so too, are international innovations in fashion and film, along with global movements such as the rise of feminism and the birth of youth culture. Finally, the impact of the local culture, in the form of Finnish tastes, traditions, and production, is also clearly visible.

 

Introduction

America was the symbol of modernity in postwar Europe. America meant wealth, a comfortable standard of living, freedom, and a peaceful life—“the American dream.” The US was also seen in the 1950s as a place where things were better, faster, and more effective. American cultural influence took a strong hold all over postwar Western Europe through media.1 As Briton Jeremy Tunstall noted in the 1970s, “media are American.”2 Not only were American films very popular in the postwar period, but US television series and shows were a significant part of programming in many Western European countries as early as the 1950s. Television thus became a major and very effective vehicle for transferring American ideas, including American consumption standards, to Europe. Postwar America was also the leading country in advertising professional practice, providing conceptual models like the Unique Selling Proposition and the lifestyle commercial, which in turn affected the commercials that ran in countries far removed from Madison Avenue. In this way, advertising was part of the process now known as “Americanization,” which not only advanced ideals of democracy and freedom, but also served as the shorthand reference to America's leadership in technology, consumption, and media.

Over time, however, “Americanization” became a contested process, resisted especially by intellectuals, and the term is now normally used in a discourse of rejection to point to the ways America exerts its hegemonic influence on European cultures. In this pejorative sense, the term symbolizes America as the antithesis to Europeanism, that which European intellectuals conceive of as their common cultural heritage. As Dutch Bob Kroes puts it:

Europe values quality; America knows only quantity. Europe has a keen sense of authenticity; America adores the fake and phony. Europe appreciates things old and genuine, it has ‘depth’; America dissipates its energies in shallow pursuits. Europe experiences itself as meaningful and finds in America what is pointless. Europe knows and appreciates individuality; America subjects it to ruthless standardization.3

In spite of this contentious theme of Americanization, which figures prominently and often in the discourse about postwar European history, Finnish advertisements of the period show a number of influences, some broadly “international” such as British film or Italian design, some profoundly historical, such as the rise of feminism and the global youth subculture, and some distinctively local, such as the adaptation of Finnish ideas, culture, and customs to the emergent consumer society. Thus, the rise of a peculiarly Finnish postmodern society can be discerned growing out of a rather unlikely backdrop.

Postwar Finland

Throughout Europe, including the Scandinavian countries like Sweden, modernization and Americanization were closely linked phenomena—and consumption was one of the primary institutions through which both were constructed.4 Before the 1950s, Finland was the least developed country in Scandinavia; it was also the only country participating in World War II that did not receive aid under the Marshall Plan. Nevertheless, American ideas of freedom and democracy were well suited to Finland, since, unlike so many other European countries, no court or strong nobility had ever existed there. Finnish values, in the progressive tone of its nation building during this period, were not unlike the “frontier” ideology of an early period in the United States.5

Finland's economic growth in the postwar period was extraordinary. The average annual rate of real national product growth by country was 5 percent in Finland in the 1960s and about 3.3 percent in Sweden, Denmark and Norway.6 The Finnish gross domestic product grew sevenfold between 1956 and 1973.7

The 1950s brought to Finland a liberalizing atmosphere, widening consumer goods markets, and the flowering of popular culture. The rationing system that had been established during the war was finally abolished and the living standards of Finns began to rise. But it was during the 1960s that ordinary Finns saw the breakthrough of a modern consumer society. By the 1970s, the national focus had shifted to building welfare state institutions, but the standard of living continued to rise gradually. Yet, even though public expenditure increased somewhat at the expense of private consumption, the volume of consumption doubled between 1950 and 1975.8 By the 1970s, Finland had assumed the form typical of most industrialized societies.9

An important factor in this transition was Finland's pioneering of commercial television—again a path that deviated from other European countries. In Finland, the first television broadcasting company was a commercial enterprise begun in early 1956 by technology students who had established their own station in 1955. An enthusiastic experiment, done as part of the founders' studies, this first Finnish television station (called Tesvisio) foreshadowed the youthful entrepreneurs of mobile phone development—and the birth of Nokia—thirty years later. Tesvisio was shown only in southern Finland. It had stations in Helsinki as well as Turku and Tampere. Meanwhile, adversaries in the national debate over control of Finnish television reached a compromise. Like many other European nations, Finland saw strong advocacy for making television a public, noncommercial medium. In the end, however, the compromise arrangement patterned itself after the British system, in which there was both a public (BBC) and a commercial (ITV) station. However, in Finland, television merely had public and private “arms,” called “Yleisradio” and “Mainos-TV,” respectively, rather than completely separate stations. Yleisradio produced commercial free public programming, while Mainos-TV leased broadcast time for its own production and resold it to private advertisers as commercial time for spots and sponsorships. The result was a hybrid system, in which some programming was purely public, while other programming was commercial, much like in the United States. Sponsorship was a remarkable feature of the first years of Finnish commercial television. Sponsored shows were the basis of the whole television business in the “golden age of television” (1940s and 1950s) in America, but Finland was the first country in Europe to allow this kind of broadcasting.10 The Finnish experience differs especially from the other Nordic countries, whose television remained advertising free until the late 1980s.

Household Culture

The United States was the model of the future and modernity when the Finnish consumer society broke through during the 1950s and 1960s. Television programming and advertising, under the American influence, provided models for housing and “good family life” during the postwar decades.11 In Finland, people had looked to the United States for a vision of the future ever since the 19th century, but in the years following the Second World War, the American kitchen, with its modern household equipment, became, in particular, the undisputed model of the society of the future. International exhibitions and World's Fairs displayed the American home of the future, and articles depicting American revolutions in domestic technology received wide coverage in the Finnish press. As early as 1948, the leading Finnish magazine, Suomen Kuvalehti wrote: “The American kitchen marketed by Eri Oy attracted the largest crowd of spectators. It had a refrigerator, a deep-freezer, an ultra-modern oven, a dishwasher and a washing machine, an all-powerful ‘kitchen assistant’, an electric mixer, an automatic toaster, etc. —all of them a dazzling white.12 In another article, in 1953, Suomen Kuvalehti wrote: “A piece of American Helsinki … ordinary Finnish consumers and specialists alike got new ideas which can be realized also in our conditions. The model kitchen of the American home and its labor-saving inventions may remain a daydream for the Finnish housewife, but still it is likely that a number of new gadgets and household utensils may appear on Santa's wish-list this year.”13 At the America Today fair in 1961, President Kennedy greeted the Finnish people in the following words: “It is with warm feelings of friendship that I invite you to come and see the picture we are presenting of our country. We want to show you how we and others can contribute to a better life for all humanity.”14

In spite of this widespread admiration of American technology, Finnish interior design aesthetics were “light years ahead in their ‘modernistic style’ when compared with their counterparts in the USA.”15 As the leading Finnish women's magazine Kotiliesi wrote in 1961, the differences between the Scandinavian and American styles were conspicuous: “It seemed that the American interior designers' idea of a comfortable home did not comply with our Finnish taste. Here in the Nordic countries we are used to seeing high-class interior design and we are proud of it. Maybe the Americans were not sufficiently aware of this when they were planning the exhibition”16 So, though the foreign technology was admired, the local sense of beauty and design precluded a simplistic, unquestioning acceptance of American ways.

Not only were the proportions and aesthetics of American products wrong for Finnish tastes, US companies did not see the Nordic countries (and especially Finland, which was still relatively poor) as a very tempting market until the 1970s. The markets were simply too small.17 Thus, though there were imports from neighboring producers, such as Sweden, household appliances became an essential part of the development of the Finnish national economy.

Finland's own domestic mechanizing developed rapidly beginning in the late 1950s. The money spent on household appliances grew sevenfold from the early 1960s to the mid 1970s. While only 11 percent of households had refrigerators in 1956, fully 64 percent had them in 1971. Washing machines were found in 19 percent of homes in 1956—rising to 54 percent in 1971. Though Finland was still far behind the USA in the mechanizing of households in 1970, when 99 percent of US households had a refrigerator, the diffusion of technology in Finland, where refrigerator ownership had reached 70 percent in only 30 years, was dramatic.18

Commercials for household products, in turn, were also a significant part of Finnish television advertising during the same period, representing about 15 percent of total advertising for Mainos-TV by the late 1960s. Cosmetics and toiletry brands also increased explosively, commensurate with the increase in purchasing power among Finns during the 1960s. Here, too, Finnish manufactures began producing cosmetic products, which appeared alongside the foreign brands that were available. Cosmetic products' share of the commercials coming from beauty and healthcare products was about 17 percent of the turnover of the TV Company Mainos-TV in the 1970s. Only food was a bigger category.

Household appliances and products revolutionized Finnish households in many ways. As had occurred earlier in the US, the impact on the quantity and quality of housework had important implications for the roles and aspirations of housewives.19 Household work and household appliances gave authority to women at home, since mothers were able to take care of the money and timetable of households, as well as creating new opportunities through increased leisure time. As throughout the Western world, this revolution at home contributed significantly to renewed strength in feminism.

Finnish Feminism

The feminist movement was an international phenomenon, but it had a specific background in Finland. Finnish women won suffrage as early as 1906—the second in the world after New Zealander women (1893). The Finnish women's movement organized as early as 1884; right from the start, the movement emphasized individuality and education. Finnish women were well acquainted with the writings of Mary Wollstonecraft, the English enlightenment philosopher who famously recorded her thoughts of emancipation in A Vindication of the Rights of Women in 1792. Finnish sociologist Riitta Jallinoja calls this 100 year span “the first fighting period” of the Finnish women's movement—it coincides roughly with what is known as “The First Wave” in American feminism. Just as in America, there was about a half century hiatus from 1920 to 1970, when the movement witnessed the second period. This second period in Finnish feminism began in the mid-1960s and was in full swing by the early 1970s.20 However, it is important to recognize that, even though the time frame parallels American feminism, the foundational impulse was Finnish. As Kaari Utrio, author and editor of a recent book about the history of Finnish women, said: “People often forget that we have the most progressive constitution in the whole world. Finnish emancipation took only 150 years, when in other countries it took much longer.”21 Thus, we must not assume that changing sex roles in Finland were exclusively an adaptation of American culture—though some aspects of “Americanization” certainly provided additional fuel—but must recognize it as the unique experience of a specific nation, with its own traditions and history in gender.

Finnish sociologists have argued that the reason behind the relative equality between men and women is that most of the Finnish working women came from the countryside, where women have always shared jobs with men. Finland remained an agricultural country longer than most of the other western countries. Furthermore, Finnish agriculture has been dominated by small farms where sharing labor roles is even more important. Because of that, men have not considered women the stupid gender, as they have done, for example, in Latin cultures.

Old role models did not fit the new social reality that Finnish women were facing in the 1960s. Yet the American housewife model also did not fit Finnish society. In post-war Finland, women were needed as workers. Thus it is somewhat paradoxical that domestic appliances, at least until the mid-1960s, were advertised to Finnish consumers by offering the housewife the possibility of liberating herself from the ‘slavery’ of housework. In the post-war decades, Finnish women were needed in the production and rebuilding processes as workers. The share of women in the labor force had already risen to 40 percent by WW II and stayed there until the 1970s.22 Hence there was no time for Finnish women for being a slave to the home, at least as in the way Betty Friedan documented in the U.S in the 1950s.23 The increase in the incidence of paid work bolstered the independence of Finnish women, too. A man was no more the only breadwinner in the family. The speed of these changes, especially considering the employed women outside agriculture and home, was the most drastic during the 1960s. Finnish women working outside the home increased much faster than in other countries. Even compared to other Nordic countries, the share of Finnish women in the whole labor market (about 44 percent) was ten percent higher than in their neighbor countries in the beginning of the 1960s, and some percent higher still in the mid-1970s.24

The new gender ideas concerned men as well. They wanted to feel less competitive and take more responsibility for household work and children: a father could be used for things other than only earning money for the family, and he also had a right to do so. In 1969, the leading Finnish women's association Yhdistys 9 (Association 9) made a statement called “A Man is Also a Human.” From the beginning Yhdistys 9 wanted to have men as members in the association. The pattern for this and for the whole association came from The National Association for Women (NOW) established in the United States in 1966, which accepted men as members. On the other hand, the first chairwoman of the NOW, Betty Friedan, advised Finnish sisters to leave men out of Yhdistys 9, when she visited Finland in 1967. Friedan told Finns that men only sabotage the women's movement.25

Birth control and contraception education were emphasized because they liberated women from the fear of pregnancy. Women now had the freedom to choose when to have children, which allow them to keep household expenses under control and to exercise choice over whether to take or keep a job.

And, of course, if we are talking about of the 1960s, we cannot forget what an enormous effect the birth control pill had on sexual behavior. Because the pill also allowed women freer and thus more satisfying sexual relationships, a positive attitude toward sexuality was part of the commonly activated debate on sexuality, as it was in the rest of the Western world. Although Scandinavia was often held up in the US as an example of sexual freedom, the image was created mostly by the Swedish and Danish. Finns were a bit more moderate.

In Finland, the young and educated—often sociologists and students—and urban women started to organize under the new ideas of gender role theories they absorbed, for example, from the American sociologist Talcott Parsons and the anthropologist Margaret Mead. Thus, where Finns did not receive aid under the Marshall Plan, it might be said they received a “Marshall Plan of Ideas,” though these were always tempered by local judgment and conditions.

Influences on Advertising Practice

The “Americanization” of Finland, therefore, did not take place as much in the flow of physical artifacts as it did in the form of ideas and cultural goods. Since American products were often either too expensive for Finnish consumers or simply too big (or “tasteless”) for their homes, many “typically American” products, like refrigerators and cosmetics, were actually produced in Finland, or at least in Scandinavia. The ads for these products, however, where often heavily influenced by the practices of advertising professionals and other “culture producers” elsewhere in the world.

The most important influences for Finnish advertising of the 1960s came from America. Finnish advertising people had regularly visited the United States since the 1920s—and broadcasters also did so after the Second World War. Not only the style and effects of advertising but also the surveys, the use of psychology, and the marketing concept came from the United States. Books written by the most important American advertising executives of the 1950s and 1960s, like Rosser Reeves, were translated into Finnish. American magazines like Esquire, Life, Ladies' Home Journal and Harper's Bazaar were also important sources in practice.

In the 1960s, however, the whole advertising business in Finland was going through a change of generation—a change not unlike the one that occurred in America.26 The new generation of advertising people had lived their youth in the 1950s, had tasted chewing gum and Coca Cola for the first time in Finland, listened to jazz and later to rock & roll, and watched American short films (cartoons, newsreels, etc.) in movie theaters. These new young minds followed trends and were committed to the belief in progress so typical of the mentality of the 1960s. In fact, much of the tension between the new creative minds of the 1960s in Finland and the older advertising establishment was similar to the counterculture in advertising documented by Thomas Frank in The Conquest of Cool.27

The birth of television advertising also made new forms and appeals possible, while also creating new employment opportunities, especially for young people. TV commercials became very popular: since 1963, almost one thousand commercials per year have been made in Finland. As in the US, “lifestyle advertising” found its way into Finnish advertising in the first decade of television. Creativity was the basis for advertising in the 1960s, such that the “idea” in campaigns was the principle for everything. Sometimes the commercials pushed norms, especially for references to sex, which was jarring to the pipe-smoking advertising artists of the older generation. Thus, there was a sort of “Creative Revolution” in Finland, one that even mirrored the innovations of the Bernbach school organizationally: working in teams, copywriters and art directors together became a general phenomenon during the 1960s.28

Surely the sexual revolution of the 1960s also changed the representation of both women and men in the Finnish advertising. The increasing use of sex in Finnish advertising was under debate among Finnish advertising professionals, especially in 1967 and 1968. For example, the Finnish advertising trade journal Mainosuutiset wrote in 1967: “The ‘prohibition law’ of sex is losing its strength.” Finnish advertising professionals saw the use of sex being part of the free market economy system.29 Among the most active debaters was the advertising executive Martti Viherjuuri, who, for example, commented on a television program about using sex in advertising and marketing in 1968. The program was called “Myyntivalttina seksi” (“Sex as a Selling Point”). Mr. Viherjuuri said, among other things, that one psychoanalyst had said that using sex in advertising is justifiable, because then we accept sexuality better: “Not too much sex though—enough is enough.”30

Sex in Finnish advertising during the late 1960s and early 1970s was most apparent in print advertising. And, during the 1970s many things changed in Finnish advertising; one of the turning points was reducing the use of sex. A paternalistic, rather typically Scandinavian system set regulations, both legislatively and mentally, on how to represent especially females in advertising. Yet, in the 1960s, many of the Finnish advertising creative minds, especially those who made beauty product commercials, were women. I believe this female participation probably affected both advertising style and the representation of sex and gender.

Although the influences for the Finnish advertising came mostly from the US, American representations of men, women, and their homes were not adopted to Finnish commercials in a straightforward fashion. In Finnish commercials, homes are more modest, seem more “rational” and “functional.” Finnish housewives don't “celebrate” household consumption in the midst of their gadgets and liquids like their American sisters in their “nouveau riche style” decorated households. In fact, the whole style of representing consumption patterns in advertising is different in Finland. The style of household product advertising is starker and severer, even humble. Besides that, household education of Finnish women was a serious thing in the post war decades. Many Finnish advertisers felt the American advertising style was too sales-oriented for the Finnish mentality. It was believed you had to maintain a certain dignity in dealing with Finnish consumers, who did not take to the “carnivalistic” style attributed to the US.

In some cases, the influence on advertising came from manufacturers, rather than agencies, and from Britain, rather than America. For instance, the advertising campaigns of the multinational corporation Unilever—for brands like Andy, Pepsodent, Omo, Olva, Sunlight, Vim, and Rexona—were a kind of marketing school, particularly in brand advertising, for Finnish advertising people in the 1950s and the 1960s. Unilever had its own Lintas (Lever's International Advertising Service) agency in Finland, but, as we will see, commercials were sometimes replicated almost exactly from their original British prototypes. In the early the 1970s, a Mrs. Pirkko Tatarinov became the creative director of Lintas in Finland. Television was the most important advertising medium for Unilever and at its best Lintas got 75 percent of its turnover from television. Since Finnish Unilever was the biggest television advertiser in 1973—with a 9 percent share of advertising time on Mainos-TV—the influence of Unilever on the full scope of advertisements was considerable.

Source and Method

The commentary I will offer here is based on the viewing of almost a thousand Finnish commercials from this period, as well as hundreds of commercials from American archives covering the same time span for comparative purposes.31 To analyze the spots, I used a modified version of Roland Barthes' semiotic myth system.32 I was particularly interested in the changing gender values during the period, since so much of the sixties ethic, in both Europe and America, focused on sexual liberation and challenges to gender norms. My beginning hypothesis was that rapidly developing modernization changed the attitudes towards gender in Finland.33 Therefore, this commentary will focus on Finnish commercials from the late 1950s to the mid-1970s, in order to illuminate the influences of modernization, Americanization, as well as the cultural values and styles of the 1960s generation.

The examples I have used here are only a few commercials from the 1950s to 1970s, chosen either because they are representative in terms of themes, trajectory, and style or because they are remarkable exceptions. The material consists of commercials not only from rather small Finnish clients but also from big multinational corporations. In other works, I have analyzed 216 commercials.34

The product advertised varies, but because I concentrate on household roles and people in advertising, the products categories include mostly household appliances, detergents, toiletries, cosmetics and other beauty products.35 I focused on these product categories because of a study done by Schiebe which found that, among American commercials in the late 1970s, “the largest gender differences occurred for concerns involving beauty, cleanliness, family, and pleasing others.”36 These product categories have also been the advertisements most heavily criticized by the women's movement.37

Commercial Analysis

Early 1950s-Early 1960s

The gender representations in Finnish commercials for domestic appliances, detergents, toiletries and beauty products from the 1950s to the mid-1960s are quite constant. And, in fact, they are quite similar to the stereotypes found in American advertising of the same period. Family values are steady and conservative: the woman is usually a housewife who is presented as a “rational” consumer. As in America in the 1950s and early 1960s, many Finnish household product ads used testimonials. Another frequent form, clearly related to the televised form, was narrative.38 A woman in Finnish advertising was often either a homemaker or a passive “object” during this period.39 Nearly always the announcer's “voices of authority” are male, just as they were in America up through the early 1970s.40 In Finland, as in the US, this feature is now noticeably dated.

A commercial for Unilever's Suno, the first synthetic detergent in Finland, is typical. This spot, from 1950, opens with a ship plowing through the sea. Then comes the medium close-up cut to a man with a cigarette and a pilot hat. The authoritative male announcer begins: “The pilot Martti Finnberg works on the open sea where the fresh sea wind blows.” The next scene shows a housewife sorting white, newly washed laundry. There is also a girl sitting beside her with a doll in her hands. The announcer: “At her home, Mrs. Aune Finnberg cherishes the same freshness her husband does in his work.” The next short cut is from inside the ship, where Mr. Finnberg is piloting the ship. Then the picture cuts back to Mrs. Finnberg, who is now sewing. The last scene shows Mr. Finnberg sitting and reading comics with his two sons and laughing. All three are wearing bright white shirts. Mrs. Finnberg, sitting by herself and looking rather plain and humble, is still sewing quietly, while the men of the house enjoy their leisure time. The announcer concludes: “With all this, Mrs. Aune Finnberg has Suno to help her, which washes everything so shiny clean: tablecloths, clothes, everything. Everybody is so happy over Suno.”

Suno
The gender ideologies are quite clear. A man works in a masculine job—in the hands of wild nature.41 The woman does the laundry and sews at home with the children. After the man has come to the clean, fresh home from work, he can relax by reading cartoons to his sons. Suno “helps” Mrs. Finnberg with the housework, but her husband and sons do not. Safe family ideologies are coded in the commercial through clear gender portrayals. This is achieved with certain visual (mise-en-scène) and narrative (pilot farther on the sea, family at home) discourses. The advertisement, therefore, creates a myth of a fresh and safe product, which strengthens the family and its happiness.

An interesting contrast is provided by the glamour appeal of the Lux campaign, also by Unilever. The idea of using celebrities and stars in beauty soap advertising is almost as old as modern advertising. Already in 1892 English actress Lillie Langtry, famous for her connections to the British royal family, performed in soap advertisements for Pears.42 The Lux campaign itself, however, was introduced in America during the late 1920s and is still running in much of the world today.43 This campaign is also famous and long lasting in Finland, where it is known as the “nine out of ten” campaign. Finnish movie stars Tea Ista, Taina Elg and Leni Katajakoski, were shown in Lux commercials. For example, in this 1961 spot, Miss Katajakoski is doing a film shooting in one of the commercials. A male announcer intones: “In her film work, actress Leni Katajakoski has learned of the considerable strain a camera puts on her beauty.” Miss Katajakoski to the camera: “That's why I use Lux soap. It creates basis for my beauty and makes my skin stay fresh.” The announcer: “That's why Leni Katajakoski, Taina Elg, Sophia Loren, Pascal Petit—indeed, nine out of ten film stars trust Lux soap.” During the announcing the pictures of the film stars are shown. Notice, however, that even here we can see the influence of international, but not necessarily American films: Sophia Loren is Italian and Pascal Petit is French.


Lux
Compare a “glamour appeal” to men. In a 1963 commercial for King's Men hair grease, the first scene shows a middle aged man and a teenage male in formal dress, fixing their bows in front of the mirror. Both reach for the hair grease tube, but the son defers to the father. Male announcer: “For both knights of the family, father and son, King's Men is their hair grease.” In the next scene they are dancing the twist (very restrained) with their partners in a restaurant. When they come home, the men behave in a chivalrous manner: the son changes his mother's dancing shoes for slippers and the father brings a glass of milk for her. Both men are bobbing their heads to each other. The closing announcement: “King's Men is the elegant hair grease of manly men. King size tube.” The cavalier was a typical role for a man in the Finnish advertising until the mid-1960s.


Kings' Men
A 1961 commercial for XZ dandruff shampoo is a little more updated in hairstyles (and is in color), but also shows the distinct influence of the Rosser Reeves' 1950s philosophy of advertising: side-by-side comparisons, product demonstration, before-and-after, problem/solution, even a scientist in a white lab coat with a microscope. This is pure “reason why” advertising, as Claude Hopkins might have practiced it. Yet the selling points and tagline contain references to “nature” and natural ingredients, at a time when American counterparts would have been more likely to point to chemicals as “secret ingredients.”


XZ “Theater”
XZ “Theater”, Filmitalo 1961.

Announcer: Dandruff, loss of hair, lifelessness of hair—the hair problems needing help. The basis for a successful hair care is the HZ hair care oil. It contains bio-active wheat germ oil, natural vitamins, hormones, fine vegetable oils. It brings back the vitality of hair. XZ suits both women and men, old and young. Rub XZ into your hair, let take work for ten minutes and flush it out with warm water. Already after the first treatment, you notice your hair renewed. Radiantly vital XZ—the gift of nature for hair.

In this first sample, we see spots that carry themes, forms, strategies, and gender roles that are very similar to those that appear in American commercials of the same period. There are small differences relating to Finnish culture and, in particular, there are celebrities and even products that originated in Finland. However, as the 1960s progressed toward the 1970s, we will see a more marked difference between commercials produced in Finland and those typical of the US—and we will see an increasing influence from other European cultures, especially Great Britain.

Mid-1960s

Some key features emerging in the mid-1960s were also familiar in American advertising. Women's rising purchasing power in the Western world meant they could buy durables and pharmaceuticals, beauty and fashion products, as well as food and household products—and advertisers began to understand that few women wanted to consider themselves simply housekeepers. The ads, therefore, began to take a more personalized attitude toward the female consumer featured in the spot. As Richard Dyer puts it:

So in order to understand the images in an ad, it is important to identify how she is signified and positioned in the ad as a female person, and to remember that any representation is also partially defined in relation to the material position of women ‘outside’ the ad, within what feminists all ‘patriarchal relations'—their economic, political and ideological position in society.44

The relationship between the product and person is very emotional and takes on human characteristics. As Leiss et al. notice: “The emotions that engage people in human intercourse (love, anxiety, pride, belonging, friendship) also engage them with products.”45

As an illustration, compare two commercials made for UPO appliances, a Finnish line, in 1965 and 1966. In the first, a salesman is the authority figure, the sales pitch is quite rational, and the woman, attended by her children is represented merely as a consumer (note that the father is not present at all). There is a close shot of one of the children, but we hardly see the mother's face—most of the camera work is focused on the fridge. The male voiceover (of the salesman) tells how efficient and economic the refrigerator is to use, while the picture shows the refrigerator full of food and a boy drinking a glass of milk: “I told Mrs. Häkkinen that the use of a refrigerator per day costs only the price of that glass of milk.” In the last scene the salesman shakes hands with the housewife, who smiles for the camera with the children tied to her apron strings. The whole atmosphere in the commercial is very matter-of-fact and no-nonsense.


UPO Refrigerator
In a spot made the next year for the UPO washing machine, we see the mother reading to her children, cooking for them. Greater time for kids is being presented as an emotional benefit that presumably comes from the greater leisure time won through the new appliance. In the representations of ads until the mid-1960s, the free time caused by household appliances meant, first of all, more time for children. This “emotional benefit” can be found from American advertising beginning in the 1920s.46 Notice how the camera pays more attention to the faces of both the mother and the children than in the earlier UPO commercial—and also how much younger and more confident the mother is, as compared to “Mrs. Finnberg” in the 1959 Suno ad. In the final scene, there is a close shot of the mother with her daughter and the woman delivers the final line directly to the camera.


UPO Washing Machine
UPO Washing Machine, SEK 1966

Mother (reading fairy tales): Meanwhile when the cat went to the forest to chase mice…

Announcer: Meanwhile, when you are with your children. Meanwhile, when you clean up. Meanwhile, when you cook for your family. The UPO washing machine washes for you, automatically. You put the laundry into the machine, lock it, and choose the washing program. You can choose the washing programs suitable for your laundry. The UPO washing machine takes care of your laundry from start to finish.

Mother: “Get acquainted with UPO washing machines in the UPO guarantee stores.

Like Unilever, the Finnish cosmetics manufacturer, Berner, used film stars in its advertising. For example, Taina Elg, the first Finnish Hollywood star, who performed in American feature films and on Broadway, walks downstairs on a movie set in one of these commercials. A gentleman dressed in a tailcoat—as formal and chivalrous as the men of the King's Men Hair Grease spot—is waiting for her under the stairs. He takes her by the arm. Then there are images of the product. In the next scene Elg dances ballet (she was also a dancer) and says to the camera: “I've learnt to like the XZ hair conditioner collection. It has also rejuvenated my hair.” In the last scene she sprays hairspray on her hair and puts the tiara on. The announcer tells about “our international film star” and advises people to do like Elg and choose the XZ collection. The admired film star is glamorous, but also international and active, not just a passive object to be admired in photographs. The clear plastic boxes displaying the products in this spot are very reminiscent of leading-edge international design in the mid-1960s; however, Elg's hairstyle and tiara, as well as the sequence with the man in the tailcoat, hark to an older style of beauty and glamour.


XZ Hair Conditioner
In the mid-1960s, there are also pronounced changes in the glamour appeals to men. The restrained bourgeois gentleman as a referent system gives way to a “James Bond” style, fast-living man. The first James Bond movie appeared in 1962 (Dr. No), followed every year by another movie until 1967. Though James Bond movies have been made throughout the forty years since that time, they have never had as much box office success as in the first impact of the 1960s. During the latter part of the 1960s, James Bond as a popular culture icon was often used in advertising.47 The Finnish “man of the world,” too, was often a James Bond type of lifestyle referent in the late 1960s.

For example, in a 1967 hair cream commercial, a man combs his hair with XZ while whistling, and then leaves in a convertible sports car with a woman who strokes his neck hair. Nevertheless, the announcer voiceover remains very product-centered: “XZ is a leading hair conditioner. The XZ hair grease binds and nourishes. Choose emulsion grease or translucent gel. XZ—the most important for your hair.”


XZ Hair Cream
This mobile masculinity, and open admiration by women, appears particularly in the Finnish razor and shaver commercials of the 1960s. For example, in a spot for a Phillips shave razor from 1967, a man wakes up and shaves. Then a woman comes and gives him a kiss, and he leaves in his sport car. He comes to work, where his secretary also gives him a kiss on his chin. The editing is very fast and the soundtrack plays fast bebop style jazz. The announcement and the filming (scenes, angles, lighting and shots) highlight the fast way of life. The man is fast and powerful. Manly gadgets, the shaver and the car, are elemental parts of his life style. Women admire him both at home and at work. The announcer copy is still product-centered, but another male voice, presumably the man being pictured, underscores the style of the gadget and points to the new “fast” masculine ideology. Notice, too, how the man is only shown from the lower face down—sometimes very close up, but nevertheless removed. Years later, American feminists would remark that this kind of camera angle “dehumanizes” the person pictured, thus making them into a “sex object.” That James Bond was both a fast, active masculine type and a sex object can hardly be argued, though one hardly thinks of him as a victim of female ogling.


Phillips Shave Razor
Announcer: Phillips Shave 3. Shaves your beard, not your skin. Fast rotating blades. Easy to clean up. Clippers. Let your chin decide.

Male voice: Fast, the silver of black.

Announcer: Let your chin decide. The new Design. The new Phillips Shave 3.

Male voice: Fast, the silver of black.

Remember that the source for the character and setting of the Bond phenomenon are all British, not American. Though the films were made in America, the books were written by an Englishman, Ian Fleming. And, the James Bond phenomenon can be observed not only in European commercials, but also in American ones. The Silva Thins cigarette campaign, for instance, shows a man who is similarly smooth and slick, but also similarly distant, even “objectified.”

Other British trends can be seen in the Unilever advertising for Rexona. In the 1965 spot below, the young woman's clothing and hairstyle clearly reflect the new fashion trends then emanating from England's Carnaby Street, often known as the “Young London” look and associated with young designers like Mary Quant and models like Jean Shrimpton.48


Rexona
Rexona, Lintas 1965

Announcer: What happened? I guess you don't have a deodorant that won't let you down?

The girl: Yes, I think that's right. So what should it be?

Announcer: It should be new Rexona. Rexona deodorant now contains more effective hexcachlorophene which kills of odor bacteria and it will last, last—even until the late evening. New Rexona, a new deodorant that won't let you down.

In another spot, we can see the companion phenomenon to the young London look, the sudden explosion of a youth-oriented popular music, especially from Britain. These two components were key signs in the emergence of global youth culture—an important phenomenon today, but originally associated with the baby boomers of the 1960s.


Rexona (no sound)
This commercial uses a selling idea first pioneered by James Webb Young in the United States: a young woman is socially rejected—especially by young men—because of her body odor. Young's ads for Odorono first ran in women's magazines in the 1920s. The stories of rejection were highly controversial because they pointed to two taboo topics: body odor and the underarms of young women. Nevertheless, the campaign was highly successful. During the 1960s, many US campaigns for deodorant took similar tactics, most notably “ice blue” Secret. A similar campaign was introduced for Listerine in the 1920s—and later, in the 1960s, for Micrin.

Lifestyle advertising thus found its way in to Finnish advertising; it used lots of stereotypes, where the setting serves in the interpretation of the personal code. Often people, products, and settings of consumption were harmonized around a unified impression—the advertisement provided a direct vision of consumption style.49

Late 1960s-Early 1970s

By the late 1960s, commercials running in Finland were showing strong signs of the modernizing influences sweeping Western Europe, including those that came from America, but also from elsewhere. However, as in the earlier decade, uniquely Finnish influences can also be discerned, some of which take the trends farther than they would have gone, for instance, in America or Britain.

For example, in Unilever's Sunlight dishwashing liquid commercials the main character was an urban, educated baby boomer husband Tiskaaja-Jussi (“John the Dishwasher”), who did all the dishes in the household he shared with his wife Ulla. This campaign began in 1968 and ran until the mid-1970s. Until 1972 the pattern of Sunlight commercials was pretty much same: the man does the dishes and talks with his wife (who is always off camera). Usually the wife praises her husband for how good a husband and dishwasher he is. In one spot she even gives flowers to Jussi when he is celebrating a new, bigger Sunlight bottle and his “everyday life.” But she can also be commanding. In another spot she says: “What are you mumbling about? You promised to do the dishes.” You can say that Jussi is tied to his wife's apron strings.


Sunlight “John the Dishwasher”
Sunlight “John the Dishwasher”, Lintas 1970

John: Listen, it's an historical moment. This is an unveiling of the statue.

Ulla (off camera): What historical?

John: I inaugurate the new big Sunlight. It's double good.

Ulla: Stop fooling around!

John: Don't be such a humorless person. I'm celebrating my everyday life. The new big Sunlight is inaugurated in Finland now!

Ulla: Oh, I think the manufacturer should cater to that somehow.

Announcer: For the most experienced dishwasher and for the new Sunlight double bottle, under 4 marks.

Both actors were famous Finnish actors of the sixties. Heikki Kinnunen, who played Tiskaaja-Jussi, had a role, for example, in perhaps the best known Finnish play of the 1960s, Lapualaisooppera, which was very critical and radical—very “sixties.” Kirsti Wallasvaara, who played his wife, Ulla, had one of the main roles in the very “European” new wave movie Käpy selän alla, which was a story about students on their summer trip. It was the most significant Finnish movie of the 1960s.

To cast commercials with such actors was a way to attach the new values of the sixties generation to the liquid. The couple stands for the new worldview of the educated, emancipated sixties generation, so Sunlight is mythically the dishwashing liquid of modern times.50Moreover, the campaign highlights the ideology of privatized consuming of everyday life: the couple is having spare time by watching television, reading papers and doing household work. However, all this is done with a uniquely Finnish twist, not only because of the appearance of the two native actors, but also because the role reversal is more radical than one was likely to see in the late 1960s in the US. In this way, the relatively longer and, perhaps, stronger tradition of sharing labor in Finland is coming to the fore.

However, the Tiskaaja-Jussi campaign was an exception in terms of gender roles in the Finnish detergent commercials in the 1960s. Usually men didn't do the housework in Finnish detergent commercials. If they appeared, they were mostly fathers coming from work to a clean home. The father could help to set the table, etc., but that was about the only household work in which he participated in the commercials of the 1960s. With the Tiskaaja-Jussi campaign the advertiser wanted to code new ideas about gender roles in order to differentiate from other dishwashing liquids, which basically were the same stuff. It was the advertiser's way to win a U.S.P. (Unique Selling Proposition) and overtake the competitors.

Notice, too, that the direct address style of this campaign is very different from the testimonial and narrative styles observed previously. This is a change in style, but also reflects the continued emphasis on personalization, the direct relationship between a product and the human personality.51 We can see this in another direct address commercial, this time between an announcer and a woman. In a Rai deodorant spot called Suojaus (“Protection”), a girl sits with her back towards the camera and fastens her bra in front of the mirror. The picture zooms in towards the girl's head and the girl glances over her shoulder to the camera. The male announcer: “Dear Miss, you will be perspiring over a liter today.” The girl to the camera: “Me?” Announcer: “You, Miss, among others. Let Rai take care of it. Berner Rai deodorant can keep you fresh in spite of liters and millions.” At the same time the picture shows the girl spraying the deodorant all over her body. Again, the difference in Finnish traditions is also evident. Until nearly the end of the twentieth century, women could not be shown in their underwear in American television commercials. So, the more liberated attitude toward sex and nudity implicit in this commercial is a local influence, not an American one. The style of the woman's hair and makeup is also very distinctly “London” mod style.


Rai “Protection”
We can see the same phenomenon, in a subtle and unexpected way, by looking at some 1972 dishwashing liquid spots for a brand called “Fairy” made by Procter & Gamble, then a very conservative company in the family-oriented Midwestern United States—now, like Unilever, a supranational detergent giant. In this spot, called Sateenvarjo (“Umbrella”), the filming techniques have developed radically, extending the personalization phenomenon observed earlier. The spot starts with the scene of an umbrella held by a woman. She walks toward school to pick up her child. The child comes under the umbrella and the mother caresses her cheek. Emotionally laden, the announcer's voice says: “The tenderness of a mother reflects in so many ways. It is an umbrella by the school steps and a caress touch…” The next scene shows the mother with her husband in the kitchen. Notice that his hair is longer, showing again the influence of the British and the new long-haired rock bands, rather than the formal, greased-up hair of the King's Men commercial or the slick, trim look of the James Bond style. The woman serves food for the husband with a spoon. The shot turns to a close up and shows the man smiling happily. The next cut shows the couple collecting dishes from the table. Announcer: “…It's taking care of the family. It's beautiful, soft hands—soft as a cheek.” After dinner the family dresses up for going out. Before zooming in to the Fairy bottle, a picture shows the mother applying make up with her beautiful, well-groomed hands. The announcer (before the famous Fairy jingle: “Now hands that do dishes can feel soft as your face…”) says: “…And at the same time Fairy helps her to keep her hands beautiful and soft—soft as a cheek.” Everything has been shot through a softened filter to create a warmly hazy atmosphere.


Fairy “Umbrella”
In another Fairy spot from the same year, a family consisting of a mom, dad, girl and boy, (i.e., an advertising family) comes to a cottage from a skiing trip. The announcer says: “The hands of a mother have things to do also here. They peel off the young ones' clothes. They give a massage for the sore shoulders after the trip (in the picture mother gives a massage for the father). Also here the hands, tender as a cheek, do several dishes.”


Fairy “Skiing”
Fairy “Skiing”, Mainos-Taucher 1972

Announcer: The whole family is enjoying a skiing holiday. The hands of a mother have things to do also here. They peel off the young ones' clothes. They give a massage for the sore shoulders after the trip. Also here, the hands, tender as a cheek, do several dishes. She is happy with Fairy, the famous tenderness. Only a squeeze makes this soft foam, which washes the greasiest dishes shiny clean. And at the same time Fairy helps her to keep her hands beautiful and soft—soft as a cheek.

Both of these spots, though shot in Finland, were made under precise instructions from the international head office of Procter & Gamble—unlike the Sunlight spots, which were under local creative control. A Finnish advertising film producer, Pentti Teririkari, who was making those films, recalls how the head office controlled the making of the commercials. For example, the storyboards had to be sent to them before shooting. They also had to go to a Nordic intermediate authority to be approved. Teirikari recalls that they forgot to put a wedding ring on the mother, who was doing dishes in the second Fairy spot (“Skiing”), because, at least in Finland, there is a habit of taking them off while doing dishes. However, the head office insisted that the rings should be there, because otherwise people would not understand that the woman is married. They had to shoot the commercial once again.

In this case, the American influence is more conservative. Not only were the corporate advertisers insistent on communicating the woman's marital status, the message they were conveying, in contrast to the Tiskaaja-Jussi campaign, was that women were responsible for all the work and all the affection in the home, including, of course, doing the dishes.

In the end, the commercials look and sound almost identical to the original English-language versions.52 However, these kinds of remakes of American or English commercials have been quite rare in the Finnish advertising business. And as these examples show, often the cultural differences were too wide and the American mentality did not suit the Finns.

The Finnish film industry got into a crisis in the 1960s, and other entertainers took their place as advertising role models. One new reference group in cosmetic advertisements was models. Indeed, throughout the West, models were suddenly fashion leaders. British models like Twiggy and Jean Shrimpton were important influences on this trend, but so were European models like Veruschka.53 Models were an ideal for a glamorous, modern and urban life style.

For example in an XZ-hiusravinne (hair conditioner) spot from 1969 a beautiful blonde is shown in different settings: posing in the studio, riding in a convertible jeep and running in summer nature. Announcer: “Is this model always on the run? And her hair stays beautiful all the time? (background music dies away and the speaker comes closer). I have heard that you use XZ hair conditioner five minutes per time. Are you satisfied?” The model answers straight to the camera: “Yes.” The cinematic means are quite different in these ads compared to the earlier ones. The cuts are fast and the split screen is used (multiple image, split image), popular techniques in American cinema from the late 1960s to the mid-1970s. Besides feature films, the influences were absorbed also from foreign advertising film trends: Finnish advertising people have visited regularly in The Cannes Advertising Film Festival since 1950s, especially during the 1960s and 70s. As one Finnish advertising film producer later said: “Frankly, I could say that we quite directly stole the scripts and filming techniques from those foreign commercials we saw there.”


XZ Hair Conditioner
Although the tone of the announcer's voice and the way the model looks at the camera was quite sexy, XZ commercial is by no means sexist. The model in her glamorous work does her job. She is certainly an object but now also very independent and “modern.” Here, again, though, the Finnish cultural backdrop is very different from the American. According to the survey for the International Advertising Association by J.J Boddewyn, the use of women as attention-getting devices was controlled most strictly in Scandinavian countries.54 The American and British legislations differed too much from the Finnish one to follow in the case of advertising regulations. Sweden was a forerunner in the Nordic countries. The Swedish consumer protection law from 1971 about improper marketing action was a pattern to follow for the Finns. For example, if a women in advertisement is represented clearly only as an eye-catcher without the connection to the product marketed, the advertisement can be considered contrary to good practice.55 Thus, it is an important distinction that, while the woman in this spot is sexy, she is not being used as a sex object in the way that was so frequently the case in the US.

In the 1970s, the advertising of Finnish cosmetics did not necessarily need to refer to glamour or men at all. In a 1972 slice of life type spot for Jane Hellen cosmetics by Flavia, two young girls are doing their make up. Only one is shown on camera. While she is doing her make up in front of the mirror, the other girl (off camera, only one arm shown) is “advising“ her friend: “Hey c'mon, don't do those kinds of lines. Do ya use so awfully dark lipstick? That color certainly doesn't fit ya. Do ya even listen to me?” The girl, who has been advised, has been silent all the time. Now she draws a line to her cheek by the lipstick and puts her hands to her ears. The text comes to the picture saying: “Do your make up as you wish. Jane Hellen.” Although common, the girl is also independent. The commercial underlines very personally the independence of a consumer. A young woman can use her own make-up as she wishes.


Jane Hellen cosmetics
Using “common people” in advertising was also a trend in Finnish advertising during the 1970s. Still, advertising professionals were suspicious about whether the commercial worked for the target audience, i.e. teenage girls. In the advertising trade journal Mainosuutiset, Pirkko Tatarinov ja Matti Larres, who had a review column in the magazine, wrote that although the commercial was refreshing in the context of cosmetic advertising, usually women buy the feeling of luxury more than the facts of everyday life. They thought cosmetics were “more mental hygiene than reality of everyday life.” In fact, advertisers were pondering whether this new, younger generation would not buy daydreams anymore.56

However, the baby-boomers were different than the previous generations. In cosmetic advertising, the glamorous film star was replaced by either a mobile, fast living model or a common girl when coming to the 1970s. She did not necessary need a cavalier man or a man at all to make and feel herself beautiful. According to Johan Soderberg, who studied Swedish cosmetic consumption in the 1950s, a mobile, modern woman appeared as a referent system in cosmetics ads in 1950s.57 In Finland, it seems to have happened a decade later.

In Finnish commercials of the late 1960s and early 1970s, men were also depicted in a sexually desirable way, but there was a greater range of style than in previous times. And, again, the depictions show local cultural differences in taste and behavior. The western myth at the movies, on TV, and in popular literature was a trend in Finland as in America in 1950s and 1960s. The American TV series Bonanza and The Virginian were very famous in Finland during the 1960s. In advertising, the myth was used mostly in advertising of jeans during the early 1960s, but the cowboy characters featured were quite “nice and mild.” However, when the most famous advertising cowboy, the rugged Marlboro cowboy, finally found its way to Finland, the advertising of tobacco was already banned in television.

In a Finnish commercial for PR men's cosmetics by Flavia, masculine male myths are used; such myths were familiar from cigarette advertising. A cowboy walks into a Wild West town setting playing a banjo, then steps inside a barbershop by kicking the door open. Right away a bunch of women take him and give him a treatment by shaving him, spreading after shave and spraying deodorant on him. Female voice slogan: “Men are known from PR perfume.” The reversal on the usual scenario from Westerns is amusing: instead of an all-male domain behind the saloon doors, it is an all-female environment.


PR men's cosmetics
Further interesting comparisons appear in the campaigns for Lifebuoy soap. Here, the main character is a very masculine looking man (a fireman in real life) who is seen as a jazz drummer, playing basketball and doing judo. The man is shown sweating in these activities, then, afterward, taking a shower. The very fast editing shows the man spreading soap on his naked, hairy body. Though this shower scene was also part of the campaign in America, it was not as revealing or sexualized as here.

Lifebuoy “Drummer”
Lifebuoy, “Drummer”, 1968

Announcer: Go for it. Here it goes. Lifebuoy. Lifebuoy. Boy, what a strong deodorant soap. Lifebuoy. Washing the odor off the perspiration for the whole day. Lifebuoy washes the odor off the perspiration for the whole day.

In 1968's “Judo,” the Lifebuoy man's female Judo partner throws him to the ground. After the sport, they both are spreading soap on their naked bodies in the shower. This kind of mixed-sex nudity on television—even in separate “spaces” —would not occur in America for some years yet to come. Notice there is also a female announcer, besides a male announcer, in the “Judo” spot, who says at the end: “Lifebuoy, for both men and women. Feels clean the whole day.” A modern mobile man is masculine but can also equally go in for the same hobbies with his woman. The popularity of judo and other martial arts was greatly spurred by James Bond and the other spy films that followed, such as Our Man Flint, as well as TV shows like The Man From U.N.C.L.E. —and all of them emphasized international actors and locations. A subgenre also arose, in which a female spy, capable of throwing her male opponents to the ground, starred. The most important of these was The Avengers' Emma Peel.


Lifebuoy “Judo”
Unisex activity and style, like we see in the Lifebuoy “Judo” spot, was a much remarked-upon phenomenon of the 1960s. It seems to have begun in Britain, with the “Young London” fashions and gender-bending rock bands and spread to the rest of the world. Soon, advertisers were exploiting unisex themes for a variety of products. In 1969 Berner launched deodorant for both men and women, titled Unisex. The spot for Unisex starts with a scene were a young and beautiful couple dressed both in the same kind of white overalls are kissing on a bridge. After that they run on the bridge, dive in the water (as the camera follows them underwater) and run in the icy high grass shore of a lake. Announcer: “For young, open-minded people. Unisex. The same feel of freshness. Unisex. The new deodorant for the people who already share everything. Unisex.” The product is encoded as new, open-minded sex by the name and announcement. There is also a strong erotic chemistry between the couple. See how different this unisex commercial is from the XZ dandruff shampoo spot, which claimed to be for both men and women, but had no sexual component at all. The Berner commercial is also a pure lifestyle commercial. For example, product's use is not shown at all. With the brand name and the announcement, the equality between men and women is encoded in the product. Highlighting naturalness, love and youth and the milieu can be seen as influenced by hippy ideology. With the white overalls the purity of the past and the space age of the future are combined.58 The encodings create a myth of a product of new times and a new kind of people.


Berner “Unisex”
This emphasis on equality and naturalness was particularly popular in Finnish youth clothing commercials during the 1970s. For example, in the life style commercial of the Finnish clothing manufacturer IWS's “pure new wool” campaign, hippish young people are hanging together in an art exhibition and everybody is wearing same kind of sweaters. The announcer says (among other things): “Today, it is natural to dress in launderable new wool… Again, the world is going towards a more natural way.” This campaign, which focused on shoring up wool's market strength against the synthetic fabrics that grew so much in importance in the immediate postwar period. The campaign, which began in 1964, was initiated by Sir William Gunn, an Australian sheep farmer, and the symbol was designed by an Italian graphic artist, Francesco Saroglia. In the early 1970s, the campaign had also reached America, where a very similar spot was aired.


IWS "Pure New Wool"
Using too much sex hardly ever crossed the censorship line in Finnish television advertising during the 1960s and 1970s. Self-regulation took care of that. The making of commercials is expensive, so you could not afford to be censored. The only example, to my knowledge, when the commercial television company Mainos-TV denied airing a Finnish commercial because of too much sex, was Vivante bathroom cosmetics by Berner in 1971. In the animated commercial a couple is in the bathtub. The man, among other things, touches the breast of the woman with his toe and then dives to the woman's side of the bath (after whistling). The woman also washes the man's hair by sitting astride over him.


Vivante
The Vivante commercial was made by women. It was quite fresh and done undoubtedly without much calculation. According to Michael Schudson, cosmetics advertising relies more on intuition and less on research than advertising of many other product categories.59 However, though made by women, the commercial was banned because “Ten percent of housewives considered it too sexy in testing.” After the “creative revolution” in advertising in the 1970s, regulations of using sexism and exploitation of sexuality in advertising became stricter.

A less overt, but nevertheless sexy, interaction between couples is evident in a 1970 commercial for UPO washers. By now, men in Finnish commercials were seen more and more in households, not only as an authority but also sharing somehow in the household work. So, in the Onnellisuustesti (“Test for Happiness”) campaign for UPO from 1970 the main characters of the household appliance commercials are no longer a mother and children anymore, but couples of different ages. In this one, we can see them playing and petting with each other around the appliance. There is a clear sexual subtext—at one point, the male hand even takes the female hand away from the washer knobs, as if to get her attention to something. The soundtrack plays very subtle music and the announcer speaks very softly: “Mister, consider whether your wife is happy.” As important as telling the quality of the appliances is showing the personalized romantic atmosphere during shared housework with UPO appliances.


UPO “Test for Happiness”
By 1973, the UPO campaign has gone even further in the transition of gender roles. In this spot, the main character is a middle-aged, overweight husband who does laundry, mainly washing the ice hockey outfits of his son. The scene in the one of the spots is the locker room of an ice hokey team; another scene is from the home bathroom. However, the reason for doing laundry is, first of all, because it is so easy to do. The free time left will be spent watching ice hockey games live or on TV.


UPO Washing Machine "Coon"
UPO Washing Machine “Coon”, SEK 1973

The man: “By the way, it's been a tough season: the day before yesterday an away game, yesterday a rehearsal, and today a home game. Was it a penalty? We've been doing fine, since we have this UPO Pesukarhu (“Coon”). By the way, it's a beast in washing though so small. It washes everything. Even wool. Well, gloves I haven't tried yet. By the way, my wife has an identical machine back home. And the service works!”

The new UPO campaigns in the 1970s wanted to show how everybody in the household could take part together in housework with UPO appliances—even men and alone—because appliances are so easy to use.60 The stereotype that women are treated as guided by emotions and passive where men are rational and active is turned upside down in the Finnish household commercials in the early 1970s. When a man finally has a role other than an authority, first he is a tender mother's helper and after that, finally, the user of the appliance, but only because using the new automatic appliances is so easy.

Postmodern Finland

The advertising of domestic appliances, detergents, cosmetics and toiletries historically also tells us about the rapid increase of different kinds of commodities, domestic mechanizing and the development of Finnish industry. Altogether they reveal the speed with which Finnish society metamorphosed into a wealthy welfare state.

There is a watershed in mentality considering gender roles if we compare the Finnish commercials from the early 1960s to the late 1960s. As an advertising object a Finnish woman is often personified as the incarnation of a glamorous film star in commercials until the late 1960s. By the end of the 1960s, females were increasingly hedonistic and independent consumers in Finnish commercials. There were many reasons for the female to be more her own woman with respect to the changes in Finnish social history during the 1960s. Work outside the home increased and the mentality of society and culture changed (against the backdrop of the women's movement, the pill and sexual liberalism). Women were no longer just rational “ministers of finance” of the home. They were represented as modern, urban and mobile subjects. The models advertising cosmetics and their fast way of life became the objects with which to be identified. There was also more sex in the representations of women. Modern identity, hedonism, and consumption went hand in hand.

The portrayal of men changed, too. In the beginning of the 1960s the man in commercials was often portrayed as the secure family man coming home from work. By the end of the decade advertisers started to code hedonistic and energetic modern masculinity—even sex—onto a man. The advertising of cosmetics, aimed at males, was also introduced towards the end of the 1960s; in such commercials masculine myths and stereotypes were adopted as in American commercials.

On the other hand, a man could do the dishes, change a baby and wash the laundry in Finnish commercials already at end of the 1960s. These cases were certainly exceptions—it was the advertiser's way to win—U.S.P. But it could not have happened without the social, cultural and historical context of Finnish society.

Nowadays it is hard to find a macho man admired by women in Finnish advertising. Often a man in Finnish advertising is some kind of an overweight goof or a loser. Today, a “traditional” macho can be found only in the Finnish beer commercials or international, dubbed razor blade commercials in the Finnish television. This phenomenon has been observed in the US as well.61

The radical exceptions mentioned in Finnish commercials at the turn of the decade are examples of how Finland also acquired some of its post-modern features in the unparalleled speed of its post-war modernization. Self-reflection and other cultural and social reproductions, and growing symbolic production, awarded meanings to the wider selection of commodities. Such features have usually been seen as the signs of post-modern times. Post-modern advertising, whose roots no doubt are in the 1960s, often plays with gender stereotypes, turning them upside down now in the 21st century.

1 See for example, Mike-Frank G. Epitropoulus and Victor Roudometof, eds., American Culture in Europe. Interdisciplinary Perspectives (Westport, Connecticut, London: Praeger, 1998); Rolf Lundén and Erik Åsard, eds., Networks of Americanization. Aspects of the American Influence in Sweden (Uppsala, 1992); Houe Poul and Sven Rossel Hakon, eds., Images of Americain Scandinavia (Amsterdam, Atlanta: Rodopi); Bob Kroes, If You've Seen One, You've Seen the Mall. Europeans and American Mass Culture (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1996); Tom O'Dell, Culture Unbound. Americanization and Everyday Life in (Lund: Nordic Academic Press, 1997).

2 Jeremy Tunstall, The Media are American: Anglo-American Media in the World (New York: Columbia University Press, 1977).

3 Bob Kroes, If You've Seen One, You've Seen the Mall. Europeans and American Mass Culture (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1996). See also Jean Baudrillard, America (London: Verso, 1998).

4 Tom O'Dell, Culture Unbound. Americanization and Everyday Life in Sweden (Nordic Academic Press. Lund, 1997).

5 Visa Heinonen and Mika Pantzar, “Little America: The Modernization of the Finnish Consumer Society in the 1950s and 1960s,” in Matthias Kipping and Nick Tiratsoo, eds., Americanisation in 20th Century Europe: Business, Culture, Politics, Vol. 2 (Centre d'Histoire de l'Europe du Nord-Ouest, Université Charles de Gaulle Lille 3, 2002).

6 Gerold. Ambrosius and William H. Hubbard, A Social and Economic History of Twentieth-Century Europe (London and Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989), 144.

7 Kaarina Vattula, ed., Suomen taloushistoria 3. Historiallinen tilasto, (The Economic History of Finland, Vol. 3. Historical Statistics), (Helsinki, 1983), 379.

8 Visa Heinonen, Talonpoikainen etiikka ja kulutuksen henki. Kotitalousneuvonnasta kuluttajapolitiikkaan 1900-luvun Suomessa, (With the brief summary: Peasant Ethic and the Spirit of Consumption. From Household Advising to Consumer Policy in the 20th Century Finland), (SHS: Helsinki, 1998), 252; Kaj Ilmonen Tavaroiden taikamaailma: sosiologinen avaus kulutukseen, (The Magic World of Goods. A Sociological Move Towards Consumption), (Vastapaino: Tampere, 1993), 40.

9 Dieter Senghaas, The European Experience. A Historical Critique of Development Theory, (Leamington Spa/Dover, New Hampshire: Berg Publishers, 1985), 71–80.

10 See Lawrence R. Samuel, Brought to You by, Postwar Television and the American Dream (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2001), 3–149; Harris Wheen, Television (London: Century Publishing, 1985), 184; Fox, op. cit., 1984, 210–217.

11 See Lynn Spigel “Installing the Television Set: Popular Discourses on Television and Domestic Space, 1948–1955,” in Lynn Spigel and Denise Mann, eds., Private Screenings, Television and the Female Consumer (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1992).

12 Suomen Kuvalehti, Vol. 47, 1948, 16–17. op. cit.

13Suomen Kuvalehti, number 46, 1953, 31. op. cit.

14 Kuvaposti n. 13, 1961 Quoted from Heinonen & Pantzar 2002, op. cit .

15 Heinonen & Pantzar 2002, op. cit.

16 Kotiliesi, n. 13, 1961, p. 862–865. Quoted from Heinonen & Pantzar 2002, op. cit.

17 See William Woodruff, America's Impact on the World. A Study of the Role of the United States in the World Economy, 1750–1970 (Bristol, 1975).

18 Shepard B. Glough and Theodore Marburg, The Economic Basis of American Civilization (Binghamton, New York, 1968), 67–69.

19 See Stuart Ewen, Captains of Consciousness. Advertising and the Social Roots of the Consumer Culture (New York: Basic Books, 2001 (1976)), 159–176.

20See Riitta Jallinoja Suomalalaisen naisasialiikkeen taistelukaudet, (The Battle Years of Finnish Women Movement), (WSOY: Juva, 1983).

21 Irma Stenbäck, “Kirjasarja kertoo suomalaisen naisen historian paimentytöstä presidentiksi,” (A Series of Books Tells the History of a Finnish Woman from a Shepherd to the President of Finland), Helsingin sanomat 13, no. 1 (2005).

22 Heinonen & Pantzar 2002, op. cit .

23 Friedan, Betty, The Feminine Mystique (New York: Norton, 1963).

24 Elina Haavio-Mannila and Riitta Jallinoja, Changes in the Life Patterns of Families in Finland. National Report Based on Statistics and Earlier Studies, (Department of Sociology, Univeristy of Helsinki), Working papers. N.o 13, 1980, 1, 3, 6, 10. Tilastollisia tiedonantoja M:o 65. 1980, 172.

25 Marja Alaketola-Tuominen, Jokapojan amerikanperintö. Yhdysvaltalaisia kulttuurivaikutteita Suomessa toisen maailmansodan jälkeen, (The American Legacy of a Everyday Man. American Influences in Finland after WW II) (Helskinki: Gaudeamus, 1989), 222–225; Jallinoja 1983, 123–190, op. cit.

26 Thomas Frank, The Conquest of Cool (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997).

27Ibid.

28 Jukka Kortti, Modernisaatiomurroksen kaupalliset merkit. 60-luvun suomalainen televisiomainonta, (With the brief summary: The Commercialised Signs of Modernisation. Finnish Television Advertising in the 1960s), ( Helsinki: SKS, 2003), 107–118.

29Mainosuutiset 6/67, 15.

30 Kortti 2003, 245. Quotation of Viherjuuri from TV program Myyntivalttina seksi YLE TV1, 1968.

31 The Finnish films have been collected mostly from the collections of The Finnish Film Archive and advertising agency SEK & Grey, which was, then named SEK, one of the biggest agencies in Finland in the 1960s (and still is). The American spots are from the collections of The Television Advertising and Culture Archive at Brooklyn College (the Celia Nachatovitz Diamant “Classic Television Commercials” collection and the Ted Bates collection), the Museum of Television & Radio in New York and ‘Women's Commercials Volume 2 & 3’ by Video Resources New York Inc. (Museum of Television and Radio as an advisor). I have had an opportunity to see also British commercials from the same period in The British Film Institute two times during the Fall 2003.

32 Roland Barthes, Mythologies ( London: Paladin Books, 1973). See Kortti 2003, 169–186; 431, op. cit.

33 More detailed findings are contained in my dissertation (Kortti 2003).

34 Kortti 2003.

35 I certainly could have taken many other product categories that are fruitful for studying gender representations, but I was forced to outline the categories. One obvious category would have been food for family representations. Another would have been cigarettes, especially to study masculinity. However, I have already written an article about the Finnish and American cigarette advertising, where I also deal with masculine representations. See Jukka Kortti, Finnish Cigarette Television Advertising and Americanization in the 1960s (forthcoming).

36 C. Scheibe, “Sex roles in TV commercials,” Journal of Advertising Research, 19, nos. 23–28 (1979). Quoted from Gunter 1995, 43, op. cit.

37 See Courtney & Whipple 1983, 34, op. cit.

38 See William Leiss, Stephen Kline, and Sut Jhally, Social Communication in Advertising: Persons, Products and Images of Well-Being (London and New York: Routledge, 1997), 251, 338.

39 Visa Heinonen and Hannu Konttinen, Nyt uutta Suomessa: Suomalaisen mainonnan historia, (The History of Finnish Advertising), (Helsinki: Mainostajien liitto, 2001), 202.

40 Courtney & Whipple 1983, 17, op. cit. The male authority in American commercials could also be a fantasy figure like in the “Good Manners” spot serial by Foote, Cone & Belding from 1957. Richard Cutting plays the tiny quarter-sized Manners the butler, who enters into anyone's kitchen to tell about the qualities of Kleenex Table Napkins to housewives with their children. (See Lincoln Diamant, Television's Classic Commercials: The Golden Years, 1948–58 (New York: Hastings House, 1971), 139–141.)

41 Nature metaphors have been used a lot in the history of advertising. On nature metaphors in advertising, see for example Williamson 1998 (1978), 110–112, op. cit.

42 Päivi Hovi, Mainoskuva Suomessa. Kehitys ja vaikutteet 1890-luvulta 1930-luvun alkuun (Advertising Image in Finland. Development and Influences from the 1890s to the beginning of 1930s), (Helsinki: Taideteollinen korkeakoulu, 1990), 132, 134. During the “Golden Age” of American television, in the 1940s and 1950s, celebrity testimonials were particularly effective in advertising to attract viewer attention. The celebrity testimonials were a “venerable advertising technique” in the radio advertisements as early as the 1920s. According to Roland Marchand, they were popular because public figures tend to assume an aristocratic role in a democracy, and thus endow a brand with high status when endorsing it. (Marchand 1986, 195; Samuel 2001, 27, 79, 98, 144, op. cit.) According to Stuart Ewen, although celebrities shine above common people, they are only people: identification is easy. See Stuart Ewen, All Consuming Images: the Politics of Style in Contemporary Culture (USA: Basic Books, 1988), 94.

43 Scott 2005.

44 Dyer 1982, 117, op. cit.

45 Leiss et.al. 1997, 251, op. cit.

46 Marchan 1986, 173–175, op. cit.

47 There was also an American men's cosmetics brand titled 007. The commercials for the aftershave, deodorant, cologne etc. were straight pastiches from the James Bond movies.

48 Scott, Fresh Lipstick, op. cit

49 Leiss et. al. 1997 (1990), 259, op. cit.

50 In one spot Tiskaaja-Jussi is called MA.

51 See Leiss et. al 1997 (1990). 249–258, op. cit.

52 Although the commercial is English in origin, it has probably been shown also in the USA, as I viewed it at The Museum of Television and Radio, New York.

53 Scott, Fresh Lipstick, op. cit .

54 Courtney & Whipple 1983, 184, op. cit.

55 Visa Heinonen, “Mainonnan säätely Suomessa” (Advertising Regulation in Finland), in Visa Heinonen & Jukka Kortti, eds., Suostuttelua ja segmenttejä, vapaa-aikaa ja valintoja. Monitieteisiä näkökulmia mainontaan ja kulutukseen. (Persuasion and Segments, Leisure Time and Choices. Multidisciplinary Views on Advertising and Consumption), (Helsinki: Gaudeamus, 2007).

56 Pirkko Tatarinov and Matti Larres, “tvten,” Mainosuutiset no. 5 (1972), 57.

57 Johan Söderberg, Röda läppar och shinglat hår. Konsumtionen av kosmetika i Sverige 1900–1960 (Stockholm: Stockholm Universitet, 2001), 126–127.

58 Cf. the interpretation of Judith Williamson on Puerto Rico White Rum advertisement, where a couple is sitting on the fence by the cornfield and both are white. (Williamson 1998 (1978), 21, op. cit).

59 Michael Schudson, Advertising, the Uneasy Persuasion: Its Dubious Impact on American Society (New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1984), 57.

60 The same thing also occurred in American commercials if men took part in the household work. For example, a man could make pancakes with Aunt Jemima batter already in the 1950s because they are so easy to make. But men could only make them on Saturdays and the wife does not need to say, “Oh, you see, the kitchen is not your workshop” anymore. However, I have not seen any American commercials from the 1950s to 1970s where men are using household appliances in the way they do in UPO commercials.

61 See for example, “Roundtable on Advertising and the New Masculinities,” Advertising & Society Review 5 no. 4 (2004).

Acknowledgements

I wish to thank professors Katherine Fry from Brooklyn College and Linda
Scott, the editor of Advertising & Society Review, not only for the suggestions for editing this article, but also for the extra information and notices.

Jukka Kortti

Jukka Kortti is a social and media historian from University of Helsinki, Finland. His research interests have been the history of media and consumption and he has taught courses on advertising, consumption and media history in many Finnish universities and colleges. His doctoral thesis (The Commercialised Signs of Modernisation. Finnish Television Advertising in the 1960s, 2003) concerned Finnish post-war modernization as studied through television advertising. He spent the latter half of 2004 in CUNY/Brooklyn College, Department of TV and Radio as a Fulbright scholar. Kortti has just published a book about the history of Finnish television; it is a comprehensive study about 50 years of Finnish television (title in English: From “Visual Radio” to Digital Set-Top-Box: The Socio-Cultural History of Finnish Television, 2007).

Copyright © 2007 by The Advertising Educational Foundation, Inc. All rights reserved.

 