Bauer
Resistance to technology
p1 - technology is not neutral, it creates opportunities and constrains human activity
		which opportunities do household chemical technologies create?
			reduced labour, more time to do other things
			improved standards of hygiene, continual striving rather than less overall work
		
		how do household chemical technologies constrain human activity?	
			have to follow instructions to avoid accidents
			have to use correct chemical for correct situation
			improved standards of hygiene/ weed - leads to greater perfectionism
			
	The control of technology by those affected by it remains desirable - but who should be accountable to whom and which procedures ensure this?
		is this relevant to chemical technologies in the home?
		
less interested in causes of resistance than its effects - resistance as the enemy of progress is only part of the story
		is not using chemical tech in the home an enemy of progress? home has different standards than industry, though formal competitions among photographers could lead ideas of progress, as could open gardens, opinions of neighbours about doing things around the house / garden in an old fashioned inefficient way.

Organic gardening is certainly seen as resistance against the use of chemicals, Photography Workshop resisted monopoly by photographic chemical companies by formulating a list of alternatives, are household alternatives presented in this way? Not so much during the period I'm interested in. Choosing soda etc was always framed as economically advantageous/frugal/ brought about by national economic strife, rather than the choice people really wanted.  This is interesting in terms of the heroism / moral dignity of resistance that Bauer mentions. 

p3 key questions
What are the forms of resistance?
What is being resisted?
Who are the resistant actors?
What are the effects of resistance?
What are the disanalogies between technologies?
The concept of resistance: towards a functional analysis?

resistance is the acute pain of the innovation process - a signal that something is wrong, it reallocates attention and enhances self awareness, evaluates ongoing activity and alters activity to secure a sustainable future. 

interesting. have I really seen resistance in any of the case studies I've investigated? Have I looked hard enough for it, or have I focused on the ease of acceptance?

p5 resistance can take the form of social movements
(e.g. organic, antivivisection)

p6 established cycles of press coverage
form a series of policy and media attention (lags behind policy attention, though gap is decreasing)
Reaction time from first innovation to public controversy:
20yrs nuclear
12-15yrs info tech
8-10yrs biotech

can I add a year range for chemicals? or does it fit with biotech?
accidents started happening 6 yrs, but public controversy didn't kick off until later, so fits with biotech at around 8-10yrs

Public opinion expressed in media coverage seems to function as feedback info for a process that is already under way. (p6/7)

p7 nuc, info tech, biotch view as leading tech with long term impacts, each stimulated dreams of a new era, from the atomic age, info so, dawn of biopic. 
public concern and debate came in a sequence.

p8 choices offer points of resistance
many different choices diffuse user resistance, prevent it from becoming a social movement. Nuclear energy is mainly binary choice - yes ro no - in contrast, info tech and biotech offer wider choices. People have choice over extent of computerisation for their lives, though not free of constraints. 

at what points can people resist chemical technologies? 
does resisting chemical technologies have to be across all fields?
or do people pick and choose which ones they resist?

Risk is a unifying and distinctive feature. distribution of unintended consequences of tech progress becomes a conflict area

		indeed, if neighbour uses chemicals when you have chosen not to, it does cause conflict. Can be difficult to stick to resistance, because of lack of information, changing formulation, having to hunt out answers. 
		
p9 public risk perception is not cumulative, it feeds on the size and controllability of danger, less on its probability. 

type of risk to health - info tech seem abstract, and has not lent itself to mass mobilisation of resistance.  Problematic impacts of info tech are widely scattered and mostly transitory, impacts can be more symbolic and difficult to recognise. 

capital intensity  and grog concentration. - expensive vs cheap to invest in, geographically concentrated or dispersed (nuclear energy production concentrated in large sites, although early experts imagined domestic generators)

p10 enterprise private or public
(all mine are private enterprises...) although public/state control exercised through limited regulation. nuclear power inherited a tradition/culture of secrecy from military roots. chemical computer and comms industries are more open, products and processes more visible in everyday use, public enterprise does not mean an open culture, private development snot imply secrecy.

p12 over last 30 years disenchantment with expertise. Tehcnolocracy not socially acc form of govt.
Struggle against technocracy is part of modernity  - resistance is part of this process to secure freedom of choice

anti big business and anti technocracy unite movements of resistance, bureaucracy rather than eng or science is the target. 

p13
resistance as diversion from the one best way
p14
resistance is an activity which is unexpected in content and form by the innovators
		as it was expected by those in chemical industries that people would decant / disobey/ abuse, then this is not resistance

resistance is risky behaviour - violate norms and  run the risk of exclusion, punishment or sanctions
		neighbour/visitor scorn - norms of cleanliness- social exclusion
		taking chemical from work - punishment


