Bauer
Science in the media
in Between Understanding and Trust
p159
With the exception of some hands on exits.... during primary or secondary educations science reaches most people in mediated forms: at the user interface of cars, household machines, computers, labels of food ingredients; at the hospital; or in the form of stories and exhibitions about science, its achievements or problematic consequences. These situations are expository windows of science (Roqueplo 1974, Whitley, 1985). People are invited to stare in awe and consume with pride. The stained glass of mediation separates most viewers form where the action lies. This symbolic construction of science and technology is an essential part of culture. Celebration or fearful apprehension of scientific achievements are core elements of a modern culture, as a resource and  a constraint for future developments. A cocktail of symbols and imaginings constitutes the basis of people's attitudes and interests in new developments, influences people's consumer choices and in some cases guides the ballot box should new depts become a politic issue. Nuclear power and atomic society, microprocessors and information society of the 80s and recent genetic engineering and visions of biosociety mobilise images of science in society in the public arenas. 

Bauer does not include chemical technologies, though he does tantalisingly include consumer choices. There is no reason that chemical technologies cannot be included in here. 

p169
into 1960s sic coverage dominated by physical and engineering sciences. Over 50% news related to whys sic. Thereafter was a steady shift away from physical to wards biomedical and social sciences. Biomed and health issues came to dominate popular press during the 1970s. 
(must have been chemical specific, as have not found anything for generic searches)

p175
overall risk-benefit arguments were on the increase, risk only arguments markedly increased, whereas benefit only arguments decreased. this marked a defining criterion for Britain's entry into the risk society in the early 1990s, a moment that coincided with the time when the very idea of a risk society entered the wider sociological imagination. 

p161
"Attitudes are deemed to be closer to action than values are, although notoriously low correlations beween attitudes and related behaveiour show ththat the modality of this closeness is controversial. Attitudes are social indicators and are the target o f change management. Cultural indicators frame the variation of attitudes. They characterize la longue duress of change, the climate rather than the weather of social life. The structure and variance of attitudes rather than their level within a community is indicative of that community's scientific culture. Levels may change in the short run, structures only in the long run. 