Boots
 Souvenir of Boots Beeston Factory
1934

this booklet looks mainly at the architecture and processes (with an eye to efficiency). I have taken notes on certain aspects relating to my work. 

p12
manufacturing hall, bulk stock storage vats. 
suitable materials for pipes and tanks. Maintain purity. 
Provision has been made to meet sudden demands consequent upon epidemics or rapid changes of weather. Influenzea epidemic may mean an almost instantaneous increase in output of certain products to as much as twenty times the normal. 

p14
bottle washing - important work
containers are new but they collect dust through transit

p18
analytical dept
pioneers in chem analysis and analytical control to pharm and otilet preps. Est 1895. one of the first analytical labs in the pharm industry 

contribute to sic pub and journals of learned moieties

6 main division - General drug control , raw vegetable drugs, finished pharmacitucal preparionts, toilet preps, research and fine chems, general investigations. 
last section improves products and develops new formulae, supplemented by small lab Speials lab, which develops mfc technique and makes small quantities of preps to meet special orders. 
Soecial investigations - engineering problesm,mechanical
Containers - control of dimensions, colour and quality. well made bottles/jars, accurately fitting caps, durable tubes etc. 

p19
cloakrooms each contain six baths, which may be used by any employee during the lunch hour or after closing time. No charge, company provides towels and soap. [wonder if this is experimental?]

lavatories equipped with liquid toilet soap and sprays of warm water for washing hands - foot operated spray 

p20
staff health service - 2 nurses, visiting medical officer 3 times a week
see 80 attendances per day, made up of a dozen or so accidents, mostly minor which are almost inevitable among a large staff. Immediate treatment for even the most trivial abrasion deuces the risk of sepsis and complications. Enable to continue work instead of going sick. 
p21much purely educational work in general hygiene is done by med and nursing staff. 

works nurse also does home visits, who works under order of patients own doctor without reference to the medical officer. Convalescent Home at Skegness, administered by Boots health insurance society. 

modern industry as seen at the Beeston Works is not a he alt  hazard by a health opportunity and everything is done in an attempt to make the best use of it for the benefit of staff. 