The Beacon (Warehouse mag)
July 1957 Vol 26, no2

p39
The work of Miss AP Wilson 
retiring from the Agricultural and Horticultural research dept after 21 years. 
. Lord Trent's air raid shelter - mustard and cress, poss mushrooms grown. That shelter has grown the first rate rHort station that we know to day. 
built up the farms and gardens dept. 
given more time for thinking rather than retiring, would be associated w Boots for many years. 
faced many problems with the company
terraced backing she had always received
comradeship
early days exciting, sometimes difficult but most enjoyable. Happy memories. 
presents: camera, radio, armchair


A ORya lot remember
report of Boots entries and successes at th eRoyal Show - eleven animals sent from Boots Farms. 
Boots Lenton Experiemtal Station
also points ofr market packing 24/25
beauty demonstrations

p8
Ideas at work
launched in 56, similar to schemes at other cos, save company money, improve efficiency. 

Mrs R Harrison Audit Dept, suggested fitted in our bottles of D.10 liquid with sprinkler tops

[what is D.10 and why would a sprinkler top help? What was it used for?] D 10 is a detergent. 

interesting that photography is a big thing - 10 day training sessions, trips, unlimited film, competitions

p62christmas 1957 
crinkled green bottle - poison bottle
with note - wish to have the same prescription, exactly the same, pink in colour, carbolic in the taste, made only for the tm o f abcess in the bums or gum boils after tooth extraction. 

request for rock around the clock tablets met with 10hr cold capsules.
 
The Bee - retail  (be enthusiastic and efficient)
many pictures of new self service stores. no mention of cleaning products, or which other products might be available for self service other than toiletries and handbags etd. 


review of a record year
October 1960 72nd agm
p5
retail  - dry and sunny summer stimulus for photographic business, drought affected sales of farms and gardens dept for several months. Aumtn less than usual crop of coughs and olds, better shopping conditions in December than previous year, excellent Christmas. 

lots of moon/space race related stuff, and staff travel either on conferences or on holiday together. 

