British Cooperative Movement Film Catalogue
Compiled and Editied by Alan Burton

pxxi
1950 CWS started mobile film unites, developing a practice inaugurated by the ScottishCWS in 1948. Offered free of charge to cooperative and progressive organisation provided they could supply a suitable venue. Based on flees of vans equipped with films and projection equipment, operating gout of regional publicity offices
pxxii
avg annual audiences were about 250 000 throughout 1950s
by 1962 sixteen roadshow operators were putting on2600 shows a year for Co-op societies. 
3 kinds of show - women's show, lasting 75mins
children show of 60mina
mixed adults show of 105 mins. 
publicity films only 1 element - also short pics, cartoons, travelogues, to sweeten the movements own promo material. Publicity firm shows continued a direct linking up with one of the CWS factories whereby examples of their products are given away - policy well established before the first world war. 

NCFC 020 the bright side of things 1930
b/w 18m 28s silent NWFA
Publicity Films
CWS Pelaw polishes

how do you keep everything so bright = essential to use the right polishes, hers come from her own factory at Pelaw

worker as user

essential household items produced at Pelaw - canning of baking powder
p12
shows shelf full of CWS Pelaw products

One great change in soncumer demand met by the factory and clearly evident in this film was the desire for articles in sizeable containers, hygienic handy and attractive in themselves. Product packaging and brand labelling are more evident in this film that in any of its compeoraries, which send more time demystifying industrial processes. All films in this series, the characters exhibit a middle class world, the home occupied by this family existed only in the dreams of most Co-op customers

p27
NCFC 047
The Travel Picture 1936
b/w 16m 24s silent 16mm
A day in the life of a mobile hardware shop of the long eaton co-op
loaded by driver... purchases paraffin...woman inspect the merchandise within the van
p28
most co-operative societies operated mobile shops - grocery, hardware, butchery, and so on = providing an important service in rural districts and after the war on the new housing estates where businesses were ofetn not established until after the residents had moved in. 

p100
NCFC186
Come Clean 1956
col 9,57s sound 16mm EAFA NFTVA
Anglo-Scottish Pictures
film unusual for the time in having a woman giving the commentary Perhaps indicative of new awareness of behalf of the marketing staff, who sought to construct a more direct address to housewives and female consumer in general.

(hard soaps, laboratory testing, home use - includes Pulvo pan cleaner, Solvo washing powder, as well as luxury toilet brands) 

NCFC 146
Co op 3D film c 1952
co 29 m36s silent  NFTVA
compilation stereoscopic film
II) a short sequence promoting the CWS detergent Spel: a display of packets; a housewife cleans a work surface and window with Spel
(man throws biscuits towards camera/ woman blows cig smoke to camera, man shows packs of cigs towards camera) 
rarity in the collection explodes the new process which was briefly widely popular with cinema audiences. Interesting to note the crude attempts to exploit the visit qualities of 3D

NCFC150
It's Magic 1953
bw 11min30s sound EAFA NFTVA
promo film for Spel
housewife uses spell to wash dishes, no sum! dirty makrs removed from paintwork using spell. a man cleans his car using spell, stains are cleaned from a carpet, spell is used for a general clothes wash
graphic card: spell does it all because Spel makes the water do the work
scenes of mfc at CWS soap ork, inc lab and animated diagrams which attempt to explain benefits of spell 
spell contains Laurex that looks after your hands. exclusive to co-op societies. 

August 1952 after exhaustive research and testing Spel the coop synthetic detergent reached co-op store counters. Spell was a co-op success story. Market aggressively with a competition for sales staff to place in order of value as sales aids. Shorter colour film with same title also released at this time

p86
NCFC 153 
It's Magic 1953 
1m44s sound
people talking about a new product, shot of by st and co-op self service store front
pack of CES spell
dirty rag immersed in jar of hot water and spell - it floats the dirt away 
2 packs handy size and economy size

interesting for inclusion of early colour footage of the new sself service stores, distinct postwar development. No film produced by the oven on the phenomena of the self service store, in the innovation and development of which the coop played a decisive role 

p134
NCFC 263
The Handy Manns 1963

col 10m13s sound EAFA NFTVA Mr and Mrs Mann prepare for Monday washday chores. she obtains perfect results with Spel, using traditional techniques he experiences disaster
mandy demos how to achieve success for delicate fabrics with cWS Crysella soap flakes, Andy exp disaster with grandmother's traditional recipe
...
following andy's disaster with cheese fondue, Mandy demos how two clean stubbonr pans with Pulvo pan scourer

Bob Monkhouse conscripted this. humours approach welcome contrast to dry and informative style of most of the promo films of 1950s
aimed at the coop houseive, likely screened at special "women's shows" provide by the film units of CWS publicity depts. With its approach of women know their domain best, the film appears resolutely anachronistic in today's PC society 

NCFC 291
Come co-op shopping 18
c 1965
regionalised advertisement campaign using real Coop members
this film shows a mobile grocery van, especially impt in rural areas. 
soaps or disinfectants often  feature in these adverts
