British Farmer (NFU monthly news)

1985 Nov
p11
hazard mark support - new voluntary marking scheme launched by the British Agrochemicals Assocn has full backing of NFU technical an d machinery committee
plastic signs to attack to pesticide stores available from ag merchants and will warn firemen of potential hazards

adverts mostly insurance, clothing, dog food, 

aticles on radioactive fallout, straw burning, warden plan ready for nuclear war.
intensive farming/ welfare

June 1985 British Farmer
front page advert for DevrinolT - Sauffer chemicals
pre drilling herbicide - oilseed rape, gentle to crop lethal to weeds, gently does it

June articles - open farms, farm trails, pick your own, British food
advert for a type of barley

May 1985 p6
lift off ester fears
NFU asking the PSPS to review ssasfty claearance for herbicides containing mecoprop or dichlorprop esters - can lift off after application and drift some distance, causing damage. NFU has been advising members not to use precepts containing these esters. Not pressing for a ban, simply submitting evidence to PSPS to find out if a ban or further restrictions may be nec. 

April 1985 p16
Don't stifle pesticide development
NFU is prisoning and aendment to the Food and Env protection bill, now in committee stage in the HoC to ensure new legislation does not stifle developments in the use of pesticides. Until now farmers have ben free to exp with non recommend uses of pesticides so long as safety is not affected. The system has worked well with a number o f sig depts ring in this way, particularly in reduced dose rates, tank mixes and new methods of application. Farmer experimentation could be severely restricted. NFU seeking to establish new force for innovation in form of special subcommittee of the Advisory Committee on Pesticides. Responsibility to encourage development o improved crop protection practices and to ensure that these are filtered through to farm  practices as quickly as possible. Conservationists support this because many innovations brought about by farmers in the past have had env benefits such as reducing quantities of chemicals used. 

March 1985
p12
Pesticide seminars 
2 seminars held for farmers on pesticide storage organised by the NFU and the British Agrochemical Association. Matt Twiddle, Nottinghamshire county chairman will speak on arch 26 at Nottingham university and on April 23 Geoffrey Butler a member of Hampshire county branch will put the farmers; view at Hampshire College of Agriculture, Sparshold Winchester. 

foot rot vaccine
