Caroline Holmes
New shoots, Old tips
p13
on Toil
ancient garden texts - diligence leads to reward mostly by toil. Constant work as the essence of the joy of gardening. 
but not actually very much about weeding, more about digging - being at one with the soil

p21
on  Women gardeners
early writers assume heavy work is done by men, men are in charge of the garden
mensturating women bad - Democrtus , repeated by Pliny
p22 women as flower growers - 
spend 3 times a week an hour or two in the cool mornings and evenings of summer in the pleasing task of planting typing to neat stakes picking of decayed flowers and removing weeds from the borders and all other operations that so limited a garden may require

the master of the premises we shall suppose capable of managing the kitchen garden, the fruit trees the grass and the whole o ft he walks himself, with perhaps the assistance elf a common gardener or labouring man for a day or two at certain seasons of the year. (both Andrew Downing, Cottage Residences 1842)

p23  JC Loudon Suburban Gardener and Villa Companion 1838
p25what can be more tonal than the satisfaction which the grown up amateur or master of the house, enjoys when he returns from the city to his garden in the summer evenings, and applies the syringe to his wall trees, with refreshing enjoyment to himself and the plants and to the delight of his children who may be watching his operations.... what more delightful... to see the refreshment produced to the soil and plants by the application of the watering pan and the syringe?

p31plenty of advice to the not so well to do on Do It Yourself 
A new system of practical domestic Economy 1825

Marion Cran  encouraged readers to do things themselves - If I had found  a garden made of another dreamer's labour it would never have been so truly mine....

Cran: Steps are easy to construct. They cost a good deal if workmen and architects are engaged for the purpose, but if they are done in odd moments they need cost little more than those rare and precious things which we spend so niggardly in life - thought and energy.

 - - weeding can also be done in odd moments - women's domestic  chores have many odd moments, waiting for things to be ready etc fragmented by machinery 

p156 weeding lawns - plantains dandelions and daisies - cut up about an inch below the surface and a teaspoonful of salt dropped over the cut part. Beeton recommended the use of salt too - cut the tops off in the spring and place a pinch of salt or a little gas-tar on the fresh wound. 


p187
CD Warner " My Summer in a Garden" 1918
I know a lady a member of the church and a very good sort of woman, considering the subject condition of that class, who says that the weeds work on her to the extent that in going through her garden, she has the greatest difficulty in keeping the ten commandments in anything like an unfractured condition. I asked her which one, but she said, all of them: one felt like breaking the whole lot. 

Mrs CW Earle "Pot-Pourri from a Surrey Garden" 1918
Weeding! What it means to us all.! The worry of seeing the weeds, the labour of yanking them up, the way they flourish at busy times, and the dangers that come from zeal without knowledge! Weeding if tiring is also 
p188 a fascinating employment.

When to weed - (modern research) advantages to digging weeds at night - split second exposure to daylight triggers seeds into germination. 
moist soil best for weeding, dry for hoeing. 
p189
JC Loudon
fragmented approach to gardening again - vigilant look-out for weeds... remove them or some of them in passing along... Much in large as well as in small garden may be effected by this sort of timely attention which induces suitable habits for a young gardener and occupies very little time. 

p191 CD Warner - weeding as moral quest
the weeds... have hateful moral qualities To cut down a weed is therefore to do a moral action. I feel as if I were destroying sin. My hoe becomes an instrument of retributive justice. I am an apostle of Nature.

(This would never be a description of herbicide use)



Authors writing on the pleasures of gardening found the toil involved in weeding a way of making ones garden ones own, (Marion Cran) or that weeding fit into "odd moments" of the day, rather than being treated as a task that must be binged on, or carried out over long periods. Despite this attitude prevailing in published work about the pleasures of gardening, there must have been a sector of gardeners who did not share this view and so were persuaded by the promises made of chemical herbicides' ability to grant them a reprieve from the physical work involved in weeding. This division has strong stereotypically gendered elements to it. **need to find an author here - so tis not just me stating**A housewife's day has many "odd moments", her time fragmented by waiting on machines and people, her labour is already not valued as highly as a man who leaves the house to spend extended periods of time on single tasks and is paid for it. A man used to working like this at his paid employment may approach weeding in a single minded way, which is time consuming and he is therefore open to reducing the amount of his expensive time on weeding.


