Chemistry the Impure Science
Bernadetter Bensaude-Vincent
Jonathan Simon


chemistry and pollution

p15  chem in literature
difficult to find modern reps in Wester lit. 
recurrent figure is old fashioned mystical sawnt
powerful yet deluded magician who tries to rival nature
chemist serves as allegorical figure for hubris

p16
where chem is presented favourably, the benetifts are vernally considered to have done more harm than good, e.g. polluted the environment and contributed to erosion of traditional values. every time some chemical product is identified as representing a health risk, there is an instinctive reaction of told you so. Rare to find authors who discuss the Faustian bargain represented by the industrial production of synthetic chemicals

p18
concept of the *pharmakon* which means both poison and remedy
Rachel Carson argued that it was not particular malevolence by the chemical industrialists, but their ignorance of the potential harmful consequences of widespread dissemination of products. 

ignorance was linked linked to public display of optimism, duped the public into thinking that the scientists knew what they were doing and were capable of averting negatives. 
p19
another constant theme was that of harmony vs chaos, that the planet was harmonious but human meddling threatened to turn it to chaos. 
The treatment of pests with nonspecific chemicals was the biggest error  (wonder if I can use this for germs? or weeds?)
treat holistically, understand systems

p20 
Carson renewed mythological trops (pharmakon, harmony) thereby creating a modern mythology that opposed chemistry, and favoured ecology. 

p22
chemicals already deployed in WWI combat, science was more deeply and directly implicated in the WWII
German cos collaboratedin production of Zyklon B, used at conc camps. Oversahdowed by atom booms, but still marked. Chem Cos had been working to distance chemicals from death and destruction / poison gas and explosives since before WWII. 
Better things for living ... through chemistry DuPont [how far reaching was this slogan, is it relevant to the UK?]



p235
chemist's janus-face image of modest servant (supplying materials demanded by modern society) and arrogant creator (imposing its polluting products while claiming to improve on nature) is a cultural artefact shaped over time in specific historical contexts that have in turn influenced our understanding of modernity. 

We need to think about the values and attitudes promoted by chems/ chem co = include progress through material consumption, multiplication of choice by the introduction of new substances and constant industrial expansion, often assuming a model with unlimited raw materials and indefinite capacity for the env to absorb by products and waste. 

These values are associated with the dominant ideology of industrial and post industrial culture making it logical that political movements criticising modern consumer society should target chemistry in their attacks. 
