Christian Bonah

communicating good health

risk  management  - look him up

av sources treated as curiosity/side show
mostly fiction - analysing represntations
visual cultures0 screening the body
sponsored ephemeral films - industrial and advertising a large genre of films
specific purlose, not art
position and function - competing and complementary landscape of info
films= archaeology of parctices

propaganda - modern sales persuasion 
educate/inform

cinema visits - large global audience
audiences - who, what decisions can they follow through
film penetrates further - illiteracy, esp rural , foreign
Big agfa branding on Bayer film bus

pharm and political natsoc
	all cataloged as nazi film
	
led to warning about persuasion 

gap between nazi ideologuey and everyday life

how far were bayer films affected by nazi film - networks analysis


corporate name
not imdivid products but trust in company name
lost many a patents after WWI
in house film unit 
society     for med teaching films

who was giving the explanatory lectures? Who was working on the script?


allied control commission
univertities
med socs
schools 
select audience - prominent individs
general screening
each own category of film produced for tehm
pop ad - short, 1 min, 1 speaking image ad screend in conema and pmobile projection
sci demo - convincing physicians 
couture film - intermediary -between films only useful for experts and feature films
dist for fre 
image building -
special - access difficult to reach audiences

industrial films are quite a diff category
who
occasion
audience
use



utility film - use identifies essence
Malaria film - only pharmaceutical methods of protection or any other avoidance?
1934 - multiple language version b&w sound films

interesting that it seems to be a white oman suffering from malaria (top row)
	where were they expecting people to sue this?
	
sophisticated processes & products
precise technicians displaying concentration
quality made in germany

military academy - actors (also in syphillis prevention/tmt films)
fictional scenario
prevention of malria in troops in conquered regions

educational and corporate promotion 

breaking the chain of malaria is dependent on the bayer product
mech solutions - typical of 1920s and 30s 
harmony of research and manufacture

invitation by letter
traffic jams to get to theatre, drew public attention

rupture between fictional sequence of finding herbs etc ewith magical powers, accompanied by dramatic bad guy music, compared to hi tech distillation

body of workers
united


bush drums, communicating to western telegraphs
modern scitech cult celebration
bayer airplane parachutes drugs around the world

are they blacked up?

emotional storytelling, patients story, flashbacks
indirect promotion by association
adapted to values of the time


very expensive undertaking to make and distribute films
	only see large companies to do this

who are the PR expects? do they learn for mthe tobacco coimpaiea in US?
strong link w n & s america - buenos bayer

US subsidiary 

in-house purposes - do not have to be cleared
public consumption must be cleared by Reichstag

38-39 breaking point for ho films are produced and circulated
post 45 another break
public television? impacts cinematic films when does it stop?

UN films immediately after war - humanitarian reconstruction aims, crusade for health etc
lost of moving from fighting for global health
early 195-s -technological, TV starts, medical film libraries, physician training films
 	and medical TV (early morning,  a bit like open university programming?) right into 60s and 70s
 	VHS

supporting written documents? 
	reception/ decision behind making
	bayer archives good
	although patchy for some areas and times
	reception side is less evident? evaluation, testing mental inoculation
	Beyer don't think about it very systematic, discuss with spectators what they've seen and what they think then reported back to propaganda unit, similar to sales reps would report back. 
	
bayer brand logo-  very strong
literal transaltion
very strong imagery everywhere, short sequencing puncturing entire film, subliminal
	does it predate the notion of subliminal advertising (e.g. Rather ted is not a racist)
	
	
all change name form propaganda to communciation/ information
in 1950s
product placement in other movies?
	



