How to Clean Everything
1954 - wonder how the newer 70s versions changed?
British book
interesting. a book for women, but not v patronising really. Some interesting technical info about chems. Is directed at genderless reader 'you' 'your drains' etc. really only told by the secion on rats "The Man of the House should handle this problem" (p112)

quite low key about dangers, but it does mention them
insecticides are included - cleaning the air of flies/gnats

p8-9 ammonia household use varies 5-10%. for stain removal buy chemically pure 10% ammonium hydoxide at a chemist. 
is poisonous and should be stored with care, well corked in a cool place. Caustic to eyes and skin. if spilt on the skin, flood the area with water then wash with vinegar or lemon juice. 

p12 - bath - daily job
trisodium phosphate or washing soda, coarse powders scratch the porcelain enamel finish and make it more and more difficult to clean.  Clean fixtures according o the metal of which they are made [requires good k about what these might be/ how to discriminate visually between them if you were not the one who chose them?]
iron rust stains on bath - rub with cut lemon, stubborn stains 5% oxalic (poison) or a 10% hydrochloric acid soon (poison). It is a good idea to wear rubber gloves if using these acids, esp if there is any small cut or scratch on the hands. After applying th acid with a bit of cloth or paper towelling rinse the bath thoroughly after a few seconds. Acids if allowed to stand, damage parcelled enamel. 
p13 cream of tartar and peroxide paste - to improve appearance of extremely stained/ discoloured bath

p13 - explains differences between benzine,(mixture)  (benzene pure) and Benzol (trade name for pure or impure benzene) highly inflammable, not be stored in the home in large amounts, tightly corked. Does not suggest CTC as alternative. 
p17 borax and boracic acid are mentioned as toxic (not poisonous) though correct storage is detailed (on no condition should it be left on  a food shelf with baby foods where it might be confused with dextrose or milk sugar) 

p43 -drains, little washing soda once a month prevents becoming sluggish, cuts grease.  usually hot soapy water will open a sluggish drain. If this doesn't work treatment t with washing soda may do the trick. caustic soda last resort. poisons and corrosive and must be used with the utmost caution. [objects prioritised over users] Must not touch porcelain enable which it damages instantly upon contact and it must not touch your skin as it can cause severe burns. If you would rather try it than call a plumber read the instructions on the container carefully and follow them exactly. Most prepared drain cleaners are caustic soda. 

p44 - dry cleaning at home is not recommended because of the hazards involved in the operation 

p52 electric range - griller and grilling rack moved and cleaned carefully after use, grease spaces wiped off to prevent burning them onto the enamel. Use ammonia on stubborn spots. The oven should be cleaned to prevent spilt foods from being burned on. warm water with soap or detergent. If stains refuse, rub with soft cloth dipped in ammonia and then leave the cloth in the oven several hrs. For neglected oven, pour half a cup of ammonia in a bowl and close the oven door. Fumes will work overnight, and by morning you will be able to clean it easily with hot water and soap or a detergent. Glass window clean with damp cloth dipped in baking powder. 

mildew - one of the longest sections in the book
p87 - chemical helpL calcium chloride, available in stores and chemists
mildew resistant finish for textile - buy from department stores/chemists (not for clothes). follow instructions
simple home stmt uses cadmium chloride (poisonous) and soap
alternatively copper sulphate (also poisonous) but less desirable as it stains the fabric blue
wash all utensils carefully after finishing with these chemicals

p94
muriatic acid - used by professionals
describes
competent worker, not applied by an amateur

p104 Petrol - listed as found in various cleaning mixture of the inflammable variety, effective dry cleaning agent. be sure to ask for white petrol if to be used for cleaning or spot removal. dangerous to use, because it is highly explosive. Friction alone can generate a spark and set of explosion even outdoors. Use petrol only in small amounts, away from flames or sparks and preferably outside the home. Do not store in your home. 



------1978
Book now opens with description of trials faced by housewives to do with the presentation of information on packaging, and also a separate interaction on accidents and avoiding them. 
p8
mfcrs directions shoudbe be read carefully and followed exactly but often are buried so deep among laudatory paragraphs that we have difficulty in finding them. Sometimes the print is so small that we skip it rather than hunt for a magnifying glass. And what about those wavy directions on the insides of bottle labels? Directions tend to get lost too no matter how carefully we file them. 

p9 avoid home accidents
domestic tragedies reported almost daily indicates the danger that lurks in the modern home. increasing array of special cleaners accumulates. they make life easier and most of them are harmless when properly used and scored safely, however each year they take their toll. 
be extremely careful in our use and storing them where inquisitive little hands cannot reach them. ...
weed out unlabelled bottles from medicine cabinet... 
detergents, bleaches, drain cleaners, cleaning fluids, insecticides and polishes, labels intact should be kept out of reach of small children. do not store them under the ink or on a shelf containing food. 
p10 if you buy a giant size for convenience, do not put mall amounts in an old some drink bottle. 

before using any special cleaner read or reread the directions the container and follow them. do not EVER make the mistake of thinking that because they do a good job separately a mixture will b even better, combinations can be lethal. Fo example if chlorine bleach is combined with a lavatory bowl cleanser, ammonia, lye, rust remove or oven cleaner toxic gases are released which can cause severe illness or death. (Many scouring powers now contain chlorine bleach) 
wear rubber clove - detergent, strong cleaners steel wool,
dangerous to pets as well as people, some are flammable and poisonous. store carefully n cool place
never keep large amts of petrol 


p43
dry cleaning at home not recommended because hazard. Dangerous when used in lg amts. improper use of noninflammable fluids containing CTC may result in sever pointing. A report in an american mag " a single teaspoon of any of the tetrachloride preparations taken internally or the fumes for one cup may cause death. newer and less toxic is chlorothene, also nonflammable. 

p42
lye is a las resort for grease clogged kitchen drain. poisonous, and corrosive and must be used with utmost cation. Lye must not touch porcelain enamel, which it damages instantly upon contact and it must not touch your skin as it can cause severe burns. Commercial drain cleaners e.g. Brillo, Celarway may contain le in a specially prepared form. 


no entry for petrol

p182
petroleum ether - same as benzine
petroleum naphtha - most use dog the inflammable grease solvents, sold under own name and trade names, use a type with high flash point (less likely to ignite)

p180/181
muriatic acid, = hydrochloric acid, clean newly laid brick and tile. applied by competent worker, not by an amateur 

p181
naptha - cola tar, solvent, explosive and highly inflammable. Large amounts should not be used or stored/ work out of doors, away from flames and sparks
oxalic ccd - bought in drugstores, very poisonous 
p174 - cleaning fluids, available at grocers and hardware stores under a variety of trade names. All should be used with great care. The nonflammable fluids are carbon tetrachloride, methyl chloroform, perchlorothylene and trichloroethylene. 
non-flammable spot removers are toxic and their fumes should not be inhaled. CTC is esp poisonous, if too much is inhaled, serious illness or even death may result. Alsoo injuries to th hands. Trichloroethane (Chlorothene) is much less hazardous - fumes have one-twentieth the toxity [sic] of CTC

many cleaning fluids combines two or more solvents, read label carefully and follow directions. If conntnets of a non flammable prep are not stated on the container, assume that it contains CTC and use with special care. 
never be used in washing machine, clothes damend with them should not be put in an automatic dryer. 

p173
CTC inflammable cleaning fluid, sold under a variety of trade names (e.g. dabitoff, beaucaire_ all such fluids are hazardous to use and directions given on their containers should be followed scrupulously. Once considered safe because it is nonflammable, CTC is now classified as one of the most dangerous of all cleaning fluids in this category. 

p184
soda and soda compunds 
 behind the trade names there is less magic an less mystery than the advertising copy writers would have us believe. A few are very old household friends. [but does not say what these trade names are that are duping people...]
 bicarb - baking, remove stains from china, deodorise drains, clean reforge, eliminate tummy trouble, help make biscuits and cakes, created bubbly drinks. Make jewellery sparkle, relieve bee stings, burns and scalds, extinguish flash fires, clean glass, tile an porcelain ad kill odours. 
 
 sodium carbonate - aka sal soda and washing crystals, notable for use as water softener, invaluable in hardd water areas. Many uses, nothing about where to get these
 
 sodium hydrate - caustic soda, lye. open sluggish drains, follow directions exactly. 
 sodium perborate / sodium perborate bleach - from chemist, sodium thiophosphate (hypo) drugstores and chemist , trisodium phosphate - paint cleaner, paint stores. 
