The Voice of the Citizen Consumer

ed Kerstin Bruckweh

Hilton

Consumer activism
p103 consumption/ right to enjoy = entitlement to citizens who had made sacrifices in two world wars. 

affluent society had to promise more choice to those who could buy, but also more stuff for people who could not afford it
consumer democracy - widely expressed desire to improve standards of living and ensure that all could participate in the good life.  even in ascetics of 1950s Britain existed a sense of universal entitlement to affluence, emerged out of the fair shares policies assoc with foundation of the welfare state. 

p104 rights-based approach associated with comparative testing movement 
1960 = foundation of International organisation of Consumers unions IOCU

p105 world consumer rights day= anniversary of JFK's speed to congress acknowledging responsibility of govt to respond to key concerns of consumer activity
right to safety, right to be informed, right to choose, right to be heard.   = pillars of IOCU policy

p106 
boycotts or boycotts part of a general trend towards ethical consumer behaviour - arising out of the boycott movement and growth of single issue political groups since the 60s, green consumerism cam of age with the publication of the Green Consumer Guild in [88. shifting away from asceticism, self denial and the retreat from materialism t and build instead on the growing number of lifestylele shoppers. 
Ethical consumer committed itself to the promotion of universal human rights, env sustainability and animal welfare. Radical once, now mainstream. 

p108 by end of 1970s, IOCU had added
right to redress, right to consumer education, right to a healthy environment and the right to basic goods and services

p109
consumer movement's political pragmatism = strength but also weakness. Consumer activities were free to add to the list of rights, but also to select from it those which they prioritised and defended. Choosing the right to choice leads to different politics of consumption from choosing the right to basic needs,

by the end of the 1980sthere wa a retreat from the prioritisation of basic needs over the right of choice. Many of the core aims of the consumer movement had been achieved, at least in the eyes of the moderate campaigners. 

-----------

Lawrence Black
Cropland's Consumer Politics

M. Young tended to develop a consumer politics outside Labour through the 1960s, Crosland concurred that 'a left-wing party should always be in the van of consumer radicalism' and that Labour was not at present. At the 1967 Consumer Assembly,  Michael Young revived the case for a consumer party 'we are serving notice on the long-established political parties... if they fail to serve this newly asserted consumer interest.

[how /does this relate to the consumer protection policies and activities of Joyce Butler?]