1930s
The period under investigation starts at a time of worldwide economic depression. The number of Britains unemployed had reached 2.5 million. It might be expected that household expenditures were under close scrutiny from housewives, that stains to clothes would need to be removed quickly and effectively to avoid having to buy new ones, that the expenses incurred on keeping a house in order might be economised on by not using a domestic servant, by knowing enough about which chemicals could be used for multiple cleaning and household purpses, or choosing well priced, effective multipurpose products. [EVIDENCE]

1939
War breaks out, but in the lead up to it, there had been much discussion of the possibility of chemical weapons. The distribution of gas masks and the associated gas drills reinforced the possibility that chemicals could be used against civilians in Britain. Could this be a source of generalised uneasiness towards chemicals, intrinsically entwined with warfare and attack? It might have been an influence at the back of some people's minds, that the word chemical becomes paired with warfare and harm, but there are always more sides to the story. Some common household chemicals, including bicarbonate of soda and even Parazone bleach, were recommended as treatment for exposure to mustard gas.  [ARRRRGGHHH - where is my spreadsheet/ pictures?] What better to neutralise terrorfying deployments than the ordinary and familiar, that could be readily found in any grocers if not in ones own kitchen? What a great sales pitch, or additional reason for buying a certain product. 

With certain supply lines cut off, chemical manufacture had to become self sufficient, or stop producing certain products for consumers ,with any production being diverted for war use. Packaging was affected by the need to conserve metals and paper, so where possible, tins became cardboard boxes and the cardboard became flimsier, the colours more drab and utilitarian, though sometimes having extensive copy about why that was.  Recycling and reuse were encouraged patriotically. The necessity of keeping rationed clothes looking good presented a boon to dry cleaning fluid manufacturers keen to provide alterntives to petrol (rationed) and benzene.  The upheaval and dirt of bombing, lodgers or evacuees presented an extra burden of cleaning to their hosts, who wanted to keep respectable, healthy, homely facilities.  Grimy, tedious and awkward tasks like cleaning the oven could be framed by advertisers as contributing to the war effort. In this case, cleaning the oven was a method of reducing fuel consumption, if not saving the energy of the housewife who was often depicted on hands and knees, but smiling as she worked. 


New garden products came onto the market to help inexperienced gardeners feed their vegetables and fruit correctly, maximising production and minimising wastage of chemicals if they were applied in the wrong proportions. 

Changes in housing 
As more households had indoor toilets, even multiple toilets, there was increased pressure for cleanliness and importantly, deodorisation.  It would be hard to find even the most dedicated of housekeeper who wanted to spend long on this task, so products that promised to do the job fast or were permanently present so that a cleaning task could be avoided almost entirely, proclaimed these to the user. 

Williams (1995, p82) points out that the linked to the migration of toilets inside, were other changes in the functions of the outdoor space. He cites freezers removing the role of vegetable production, central heating eliminating solid fuel storage, tumble driers replacing laundry lines.  The space used by, or infringed upon by dirty, routine and utilitarian necessities held potential to be used for desired activities, which might still include growing produce, drying laundry and storing fuel, but would be more available for recreational activities.  

The availability of new synthetic materials for the home and garments meant a new set of rules about stain removal and appriate treatment had to be learned by those who wanted to keep their fashionable products looking good. Along with the new wave of domestic labour saving appliances came a demand for chemical products. Had anything similar been seen with electification/ gasification?  

A need to maximise the productive capacity of Britain's farmland meant that in the 1960s a completely new method of farming was developed to accompany a new weedkiller invented by ICI. Gardening was a popular expression of domesticity DIY and if there were miracle weedkillers to lighten the load of continual vigilance against weeds, gardeners wanted them. Green, verdant lawns and neat orderly gardens could be interpreted as a reaction against burned out, bombed and disorderly landscapes of war [did someone say this? e.g. Church, or one of the gardening history books?). This was an arena where people could be in charge (not the weeds).

At the same time there was a growing awareness of the unknowns and unintended consequences associated with the use of herbicides and pesticides on farms. Visible bird deaths from poison-dressed seeds, quieter hedgerows and fields, bald verges became the subject of public debate as Rachel Carson's Silent Spring was read. The British Government were keen to stress that the situation in America was very different, the vastly bigger farms and industrial quantities of chemical biocides were not comparable to what happened on British farms, and that there were already systems in place to deal with the safety of agricultural chemicals.  [Mark ref] In tension with this was the problem of litter and the countryside, where the volume of rubbish left by visitors was at odds to the supposed desire not to pollute the environment with chemicals. Perhaps chemicals, undetectable by the eye and with mysterious actions on the body, were more frightening than physical domestic waste of wrappers, bottles and papers which would cause a nuisance but unlikely to be life threatening to humans, though they could entangle or trap wildlife. 

In 1964 Horizon aired "Pesticides or Posterity" in which a sensitive countryside landed, plus fours wearing, Rolls Royce driving gentleman romantically talked about the need for wilderness and balances between farming and nature was paired with a director of a modern chemical plant, much modest in his choice of car talked about the need for chemicals to help feed the population and their role in avoidable illnesses across the world, complete with gruesome images of elephantiasis and river blindness. This was a very early, if not the first, public use of the term "chemophobia". The chemical plant director directly linked the general fear of chemicals to their percieved potential to do harm, stressing that despite all a company's safety tests, any chemical could be misused by someone somewhere who was determined to cause harm.  

Even though these uses initially seem like they are purely agricultural, their effects were felt or percieved more widely, perhaps through greater reporting of rare incidents or greater experience of other countires and cultures as people became more widely travelled, perhaps greater sense of what consumers should be informed of and of their power. For those living near farms, notification of farmers using sprays and the complications of spray drift were worries. Even though ariel spraying was rarely appropriate in the UK, and to spray in condition s that would result in the misapplication (wastage) of chemical would not be in the farmer's interest, the idea that helicopters were spraying complicated poisons caused fears. There were stories into the 1980s of people who had been severely sickened, incapacitated by exposure to agricultural chemicals while in their own garden. The issues of residues from agricultural chemicals on foodstuffs was of concern, whether it was detectable simply by taste or that there was a known or unknown physical effect.  Infertility, miscarriage, birth defects, behavioural issues such as hyperactivity and autism all became linked to  chemicals in the environment or in food, whether a person had knowingly or unknowingly encountered and been affected by them. 

The idea that cancer, devestating and hard to explain,  was increasing in frequency was an important factor in these routes of exposure through the place that you lived, worked, breathed or ate.  Perhaps it was newspaper reporting, government drives to improve cancer diagnosis and treatment, increased detection and naming, facilitating the removal of barriers to talking about cancers meaning that they were in the public mind as something that could happen to you. Trivial, everyday choices became laden with cancerphobia. Animal testing for agricultural and household chemicals was crude, with lethal doses, (LD50s), irritancy, and teratogencity being used as indicators of the chemical's likely effect on humans. [I actually haven't read very much about this- though I suppose I must have read something] The true effects could be quite different but the fact that tumours were something that cropped up as outcomes in these investigations was alarming to any casual reader. The communication of what these results mean (in terms of risk) for normal exposure or everyday life has been something of a battle. It is hard to generalise, as peoples susceptibility to disease and chemicals are so varied.  As seen with studies of chemicals like arsenic, a dose that could kill one person might merely irritate another. This is not to mention the variabiliy in doses that any person might be exposed to. The length of time spent using a product or chemical in one sitting, how well or poorly ventilated the space might be, whether protective clothing is worn (here I count an apron or housecoat as protective clothing, as it is an extra barrier to splashes and dusts).

Leaky knapsack sprayers were news when they caused agricultural workers to have close prolonged contact with undesirable chemicals, but how often were faulty household packages held up for inspection or for blame? 
(some kind of cleaner bought from harrods is all I can think of here) Plant Protection found that they needed to enlarge the empty space in their package of weedol to prevent spillage, although contact with the granules was not believed to be problematic clearing up spillages was  inconvenient and potentially wasteful. Packaging could well help dispense or apply, but the negative outcomes were not dwelt upon by the manufacturers in their packaging chat. Even agricultural chemical manufacturers were pressured to change the wording in their precautionary instructions to include why they were being given, rather than they should be followed. Why does help those who read it or have to convey the information to others understand, but it can also be frightening and possibly even deter a potential user from the product. Thus, the focus is always on the benefits of the product, or the negatives of other products, for example cleansers that could scratch the surfaces and make long term cleaning even more difficult. 

Generally the packaging or delivery technology was not faulty, but there was much discussion about the packaging of chemicals. Bottles with vertically ribbed or fluted sides were required to allow people to tell by touch that they had selected, generally from some dark cupboard or poorly illuminated shed, a poisonous liquid. The practice of reusing drinks bottles to decant, make up or store chemicals in proved fatal on numerous ocasions. There was even a case of a retailers who should have known better  delivering a solution of gramoxone in a milk bottle, even leaving it on the step. There was no way that dark brown liquid would have been confused for milk, but the innocuous everyday item of a milk bottle sends cues to the user that like milk, the contents are benign. The affordances that products communicate to the user are important and sometimes not enough attention was paid to them. 

Childproof tops for household products and pharmacueticals were from the beginning held up as more of a hinderance to the adult users rather than the unconstrained experimentalists they were trying to keep out. However, they do signal to the imagined user that the contents should be kept strictly for its designated use. However, as ROSPA ? reports found, the majoirty of accidents involving children and household chemicals was when the product was in use and the adult was not attending to the child, rather than being taken from the place of storage. This kind of accident cannot be legislated against, although people can be educated or directed to the common sense actions they could take in their own homes. Medicine cabinet designs incorporating sloping top that prevented items being put down on top and forgotten (seen today in some the design of some bar toilets, where you cannot put drinks or other substances down easily) was promoted in repsonse to the finding that many of the accidental poisoings were from prescribed drugs, left out by adults. Child proof latches for cupboards don't seem to have been patented during the time under study, though they were certainly in use in the mid 1980s.

