CWS Household Hints
booklet
CHS CWS(P)
Box 3
produced by / with the compliments of CWS Soap Works

gives suggestions in paragraphs, but not all are associated with a product. About every third or fourth paragraph a CWS product is promoted, eg. CWS Bath Carbolic Soap to wash hands after touching money, dogs, cats, handles of tramcars or railway carriages or dusty objects (p5),
At foot of page unrelated to anything 
Try CWS Crystals n your bath

other products are not branded
e.g. castor oil, vaseline, cold cream, eau de cologne 
foot bath of salt, and washing soda (p6)

first aid supplies are unbranded
p8 
burns - if you are out of boric ointment or powder, use bicarbonate of soda. Flour also can be used instead of boracic powder. Nothing so good as a grated raw potato (much of the paragraph is devoted to the benefit of potato)

poisoning p9 - very brief section
vomit - finger or drink of mustard/salt in lukewarm water
purge - dose of castor oil to sweep poison out of bowels

cuts and wounds - boracic lint (which should be kept in every household)
Defy germs with CWS carbolic Soap (page footer - no other mentions of germs)

p11 
good remedy for insomnia CWS stomach powder
if your hair is greasy and over-oily give it a dry shampoo with CWS bay rum midway between your usual wet shampoos. The bay rum not only makes your hair attractively soft and glossy, it definitely helps to check the oily condition
page footer - A pleasing Shave with Crysella Cream

p12
for dry hair - Newsheaf or Green olive oil soap and a little olive oil

if you make your own shampoo, using the CWS soap of your fancy you can perfume it by stirring a few drops of oil of verbena into the soap jelly before using it

good home made hair wash - 1tsp powdered borax, 1tsp lemon juice, 1 oz shredded CWS white soap, 1tsp sulphur and 8 tablespoons boiling water. Place in a bottle, cork, shake well. 

Interesting that they suggest making own shampoo/hairwash though they do highlight CWS brand soap, and show that borax and sulphur were everyday items by their lack of explanation. 

p13
boracic crystals again - this time dissolved in rosewater for an eyebath
CWS cold cream is invaluable and should always be handy

no mentions of products or chemicals (all food items for skin care recipes)
p15 page footer Chase Dirt Away with CWS soap

p16
turpentine to prevent mildew - wads of cotton wool soaked and placed in sacucers on shelves or in draws prevent mildew to leather items. also rub leather with oil of turpentine. 

moth crystals (no chemical name, no brand)

keep two deep jars at the side of the scullery sink, one filled with whitening, the other with powdered bath brick. To clean the knives damp the blades then dip in
CWS Anticrime should be used for washing
CSW Solvo results in most refreshing cleanliness. 

p17 to loosen a stubborn screw, apply a little vinegar and let it soak in. Often successful where oil fails. 
page footer CWS Soaps for all kitchen needs

p18
It has been discoered that by adding a teaspoon full of alum to the blacklead before putting it othe brush a splendid polish can be obtained with half the amount of work.

ink on carpet - cover it with salt immediately. 

p19
drops of gravy form otherwise clean cloth - rub some powdered french chalk on the marks ad leave for a few hours. the grease will be absorbed and the cloth left spotless. 

stained hands by flirt or vegetable, or ink, tartaric acid. Rub in when the hands are wet. 

enamelled baths
use a cloth sprinkled with paraffin and dipped in salt. Better still - try CWS antigrime.

p20
stains on stone slabs on which gas stoves stand - paste of fullers earth. rub with stong soda water, then spread paste over marks and leave to dry. Cover with another application and leave to dry. Finally scrub.

mincing machines must be kept scrupulously clean. After use, take yours to pieces and wah all the parts in hot water and soda, using a bush if it is necessary. 

p21
the best way to remove grease on stoves is to rub it with a newspaper and then use CWS Anticrime

when the rim of a pie-dish becomes burnt, rub with with CWS Pulvo.  [very specific use here, haven't seen pulvo mentioned before)

page footer Quick and eAsy Work with CWS Soaps

p22
to wash a pudding cloth after being used, soak about an hour in cold water, adda lump of soda, bring slow to a boil then boil quickly about a quarter of an hour. 
look after the sink
remember that your sink pipe needs a dose of disinfectant sometimes just like any other pipe. CWS Microl soap should always be used to make free from unpleasant odours. 
If a pound of washing soda is put into the sink each week dn dissolved with boiling water, there is little danger of stoppage. 

after long, detailed passage on CWS branded soaps
p28 there is a section on bath  tables, bath cubes and bath crystals. fragrance and soften hard warter. 
p29 Soda is Handy
Today should find a place in every kitchen cupboard. Its uses are manifold to a housewife in her daily routine. Soda is a most potent aget from he removal of grease from pots, pans and cooking utensils but very thorough rinsing should be given after its use as any trace of it left in a cooking utensil may be responsible for a spoilt meal.
p30 bicarbonate of soda should always be used for cooking purposes, and then only in very small quantity .Always keep it in a tightly covered jar, in a dry cupboard. It should not be bought in large quantities as it loses its properties when stale or allowed to get damp. 
makes a cooling and soothing lotion to apply to irritated skin, always assuming of course that the ittitation is of a mild and harmless character. 

petrol useful
all clothes can be cleaned up and made to look quite fresh with the aid of petrol. Care however must be taken in its use. 

p31 
mud on coat - brush off, if stain remains, dissovle a tsp of carbonate of soda in a pint of water
spots on clothes - raw potato
marks on velvet - eucalyptus oil
shiny clothes - vinegar
machine grease - sponge with ammonia then launder. 


soaps
hardosaps - all purpose, general laundry, household, suitable for toilet use also. 
Minervera Congress, Wheatsheaf, Unitiy and Newsheaf particulalry suitable for districts with hard water. 
Honey Colden Honey, Special Honey, Finset Catile, London Washer, Teration and Toilet cold water all high class general household soaps. 

cleaning soaps 0 workman's cleanse, co-op cleanser and Naptha, all made specially for quick and easy work, Natptha being particularly suitable for this purpose and for washing dirty and greasy clothes. 

So  many soaps. 
p26
CWS make several varietyies of soft soaps for general cleaning, including Camphor, Carbolic and Ammonia soft soaps. 
Specialities are parrot soap a polishing soap for pans and tins, whilst Pulove polishing powder is for use in the scullery bathroom lavatory and c. For the gardener motorist for classier metal ware ad c and for removing any objections odour from pans after frying fish, there is anticrime, a very handy paste cleanser. 
CWS liquid cleaner which can be used in a variety of ways - for washing woollens and c. cleaning suits, dresses, paintwork and as an insecticide for sparing rose trees &c. 

Nothing about obtaining the chemicals mentioned previously 
Difficult to tell who the book is meant for. Illustrations are of both maids and housewives, so probably 20s, 30s addressing the crossover. Bath brick and whitening. No solvents for grease removal, which makes me think perhaps the 20s, before Thawpit took off properly. 
