looks like CWS packed chems/drugs, rather than produced them

p66
misc foods confectionary drugs and culinary products went into millions of containers at packing factors at Trafford Park and Droylsden. 

factories were cotton mills, flannel workds, shirting mill, corset factory, mantle factory garment factory, making/processing umbrellas, hats, furs, handkerchiefs, leather good, quilts

p171
Droylsden Drug factory


-------

A Consumers' Democracy
1951
p119
in more than half the households in England and Wales there is at least one member of a co-op soc. In some there is more than one. Husband and wife may both become embers in order that each may enjoy the democratic rights of membership or because the family shareholding has reached the limit of £200 permitted to one shareholder. Or a member may have equally convenient access to the services of two sons and join both. The exact promotions of the various forms this dual or duplicated membership may take aren to known even within the movement. But a survey made by the CWS Mkt Rs Dept in 1944 indicated that the movement was serving just over one half of all the households in the country with som part of their domestic requirements. 
drawn from all classes, freely open to all. 
to factory ad industrial workders appeal is particularly strong, 2 out of 3 miners families contain a co-op member. Even among the social groups - professional classes, farmers, proprietors of shops and businesses about 1 in 4 housholds contains a member. Spent an average of £49 with their societies in 1949, about 30s per week
25% of the pop has registered at co-op socks for the rationed commodities.

p130
CWS sales in 1949
grocery/privisions tobacco - 205 488 057

Horticulture is not mentioned, though there was a horticulture dept which produced seeds and manures/fertilisers etc - see the Wheatsheaf's gardening column. 

p137-138
image of testing panel trying two samples of table jelly - 5 ladies mid to older, flanked by two white coated ladies observing them
By market research the CWS keep sin touch with the habits and preference of its customers. More than 25 000 members of the public are interviewed annually by the Market Research Dept staff. 
Organised study of consumers' behaviour forms an increasing part of modern methods of marketing and it would be surprinsg if the consumers coop movement had not taken a lead. The CWS is one of the few mfcing and distributive orgs in GB to have a Mkt Rs Dept employing its own field staff for establishing direct contact with the purchasers and consumers of its products. 

p139 
...very doubtful of the contribution which much ad expenditure makes to the consumers welfare. 
CWS is one of Britains largest advertisers although in fact its ad expenditure in respect of most individual products absorbs a small proportion of the price of any one article compared with that spent by many of its competitor. 