http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/v014/14.2.thomas.html

Browse > Social Sciences > Business and Society > Advertising & Society Review > Volume 14, Issue 2, 2013
Deconstructing Hegemonic Masculinity:
Understanding Representations of Black and White Manhood in Print Advertising
Kevin D. Thomas (bio)
Introduction
Hegemonic masculinity is a symbiotic construction. Left to its own devices, hegemonic masculinity would collapse in upon itself because it would no longer be able to support the weight of the myths upon which it is built. It is only through its relationship with other socially constructed concepts that hegemonic masculinity is able to thrive. Most notably, hegemonic masculinity derives its meaning and power through its dichotomous interaction with hegemonic femininity, particularly in the ways in which hegemonic femininity aids to define what hegemonic masculinity is not. If sensitivity, gentleness, and passivity were all coded as feminine traits, masculine traits would encompass their antithesis (i.e., indifference, aggressiveness, and domination). However, hegemonic masculinity is dependent upon more than hegemonic femininity for meaning.
Research related to advertising and hegemonic masculinity typically does not engage their relationship from an intersectional perspective. Developed by Black Feminist scholars, the theory of intersectionality presumes that sites of identity are inextricably linked.1 Rather than viewing identity characteristics as independent units, identity markers such as race, gender, sexual orientation, and social class are deemed as interacting on several, and often, overlapping spheres. As stated by Collins, an understanding of the self requires a clear comprehension of how identity characteristics interrelate with one another, societal systems, and structures.2 Research conducted using an intersectional approach provides such a perspective.
A look back at representations of black and white masculinity during and directly after the antebellum era3 clearly illustrates the importance of incorporating intersectionality into the study of hegemonic masculinity. Prior to the end of enslavement, the Sambo figure represented the dominant discourse relating to black masculinity.4 This archetype was perceived as dim-witted, lazy, and happy-go-lucky. These are all traits that were clearly not associated with the dominant discourse of white masculinity. White manhood was configured around enterprising thought, strong work ethic, and judiciousness.
It is important to juxtapose these constructions with dominant discourses of black femininity to illustrate a clear picture of the fluidity of hegemonic masculinity. During the antebellum period, black femininity was predominantly embodied in the Mammy caricature.5 She was positioned as a strong, diligent worker who was fiercely loyal to her white owners. Conversely, white femininity was portrayed as the nexus of beauty, morality, and respectability.6 As such, black femininity as it was embodied in the black female mammy was positioned closer to the understanding of white masculinity than to the construction of black masculinity as revealed in the black male Sambo. Black men were completely divorced from masculinity (in its white hegemonic form), while black women had masculine traits sutured onto their identity, thereby divorcing femininity (in its white hegemonic form) from black women. Following the end of enslavement, there was a turn in the dominant discourse of black masculinity—the Sambo gave way to the Brute Negro. As strikingly portrayed in D.W. Griffith's Birth of a Nation, the Brute Negro (as he is presented in the blackface character of Gus) was innately savage, animalistic, and a predator of white women. This characterization is a far cry from the antebellum Sambo. During slavery, the dominant portrayal of black masculinity framed black men as harmless imbeciles; post-emancipation, the discourse had reconstructed black masculinity and equated it with hyper-masculine savagery.7
In order to understand this shift, the state of the nation must be examined. During the time of the Sambo, it was in the nation's best interest to differentiate black masculinity from white masculinity—the institution of enslavement demanded it. Proponents of enslavement created and disseminated representations of black masculinity (and Blackness in general) that justified slavery and assuaged white guilt.8 Correlating black masculinity with an underdeveloped, childlike existence became part of the process of rationalizing and validating enslavement. This positioning bolstered the narrative that slave owners acted as surrogate parents dutifully guiding the progress of all of those within their sphere of influence.
However, post-emancipation Sambo ceased to be a productive site of black masculinity discourse. In order to uphold white supremacy, black masculinity was transformed from childlike to evil incarnate. By aligning black masculinity with criminality and savagery, the nation created the space to contain the threat now viewed as inherent in black men. In the post-emancipation era, the dominant discourse regarding white masculinity was largely kept intact. However, notions of white masculinity correlating with being a provider and protector were heightened.9 This review of masculinity pre- and post-emancipation demonstrates the key role that race plays in how hegemonic masculinity is (re)constructed. These findings make it evident that any productive analysis of masculinity must incorporate a thorough discussion of multiple sites of identity.
Advertising has long served as a curator of hegemonic masculinity discourse. Minstrel-inspired spokespersons, such as B&G Food's Rastus, The Quaker Oats Company's Aunt Jemima, and Converted Rice Incorporated's Uncle Ben, functioned to naturalize the dominant discourses surrounding masculinity and femininity. As such, advertising images serve as a fertile site to investigate current constructions of hegemonic masculinity. The goal of this research project is to apply an intersectional analysis to the study of advertising and hegemonic masculinity. In so doing, the ways in which the complex mixing of race, gender, sexuality, and social class affect the construction of hegemonic masculinity can be better understood.
Literature Review
A number of consumer researchers have investigated the linkages between advertising and notions of masculinity. Via a content assessment of 87 magazine advertisements featured in a broad cross-section of periodicals, O'Barr investigated gender representations throughout the life cycle.10 O'Barr's findings underscore the socially constructed nature of gender and highlight the ways in which advertising uses, and therefore reinforces, gender roles. In regards to masculinity, O'Barr's analysis demonstrates how expressions of masculinity shift by life-cycle phase. In childhood, masculinity is in large part sutured to one's maleness and the commodities that symbolize said maleness (e.g., a blue versus a pink blanket); in adolescence and beyond, males are expected to also articulate masculinity through their physicality. Maintaining and actively displaying a sculpted body is the apex of masculine expression.
In an exercise termed "visual genealogy," Schroeder and Zwick illustrated how visual elements of advertising provide a system of difference between masculinity and femininity.11 Their analysis repositioned representations of masculinity from a space of mere expression to the more critical location of formation. As the author's state: "Representations do not merely 'express' masculinity, rather, they pay a central role in forming conceptions of masculinity ...". The work of Schroeder and Zwick emphasized the semiotic relationship shared between masculinity and femininity, as well as demonstrated the usefulness of critically focusing on advertising images to better understand the meaning of manhood. As such, it built upon previous scholarship conducted by Scott12 and Stern.13
In their series of content analyses, Gentry and Harrison expose the problematic tendencies of advertising's gender portrayals.14 While their findings suggest a broadening of gender portrayals among females, representations of males adhere to one of two narrow conceptualization of masculinity—the stoically macho man and the horse's ass. The stoically macho man epitomizes "rugged masculinity." He is enterprising, capable, and has an affinity for sports and outdoor activities. Conversely, the horse's ass is infinitely inept. He is an incompetent worker, husband, and father that consistently attempts to solve problems by way of violence. Gentry and Harrison argue that the narrow framework advertisers use to represent masculinity contradicts the lived experience of most men, which is increasingly ambiguous in relation to gender roles. The authors conclude the representation of gender in advertising exacerbates the atmosphere of gender confusion found in present-day society.
Through the use of qualitative techniques, Zayer developed a typology of ideal masculinity as represented by advertising that included men of the Generation X cohort.15 Her findings suggest the existence of eight ideal masculinity themes—the Adventurer, the Athlete, the Attractive Man, the Daredevil, the Family Man, the Goal-Driven Man, the Individual, and the Strong Man; as well as highlight three potentially antithetical themes—the Partier, the Player, and the Slob.
While many of Zayer's themes are in keeping with previous categorizations established by Brannon16 and refined by Lindsey17 , critical differences did emerge. In the Brannon/Lindsey typology, assuming and maintaining the role of family-unit financial provider was a key element of ideal masculinity, as was proving one's sexual prowess with women. However, among her informants, Zayer found the former to be declining in salience and the latter to be viewed as contradictory of ideal masculinity, which further demonstrates the fluidity of "domina nt" masculinity. It should be noted that Zayer's sample consisted mainly of white, well-educated heterosexual men, a group that historically has been privileged. The ways in which masculinity is framed and expressed cannot be completely understood by examining only privileged populations of men; those with a more marginalized social status must also be considered.
In regards to the portrayal of African-American males in advertising, Bailey's two-stage content analysis of magazine advertisements uncovered key distinctions in frequency and execution.18 Bailey performed a quantitative assessment of advertisements featured in three hip-hop related magazines, two magazines aimed at African Americans, and two magazines directed at the general population of the U.S. Whereas more than 60 percent (63.6%) of advertisements featured in magazines related to hip-hop culture depicted at least one African-American male, fewer than fourteen percent (13.8%) of the ads in magazines directed at the general population included a depiction of an African-American male. In the area of execution, African-American males tended to be portrayed in non-occupational roles (with the noted exception of athlete and entertainer) and featured in a narrow range of product categories (e.g., brands advertising apparel, footwear, or fashion accessories) across both sets of magazines.
Bailey's work accentuates the ways in which race affects the potential construction and expression of masculinity. For instance, the use of work and work settings clearly differentiates how advertising represents black from white masculinity. While employment, even in its most banal configurations is seen as part and parcel of representations of white masculinity, this logic seems to be inversed when masculinity is associated with black males. The breadth of product categories that feature white and black masculinity also makes them distinct. Confining the portrayal of black masculinity to a limited set of product categories may narrow the scope of products associated with black masculinity and therefore restricts how black males can express their masculinity via the symbolic value of marketplace commodities.
Purpose of Study
Interpretive research related to advertising and masculinity has generally overlooked how race may affect the construction and expression of hegemonic masculinity. Bailey's work spotlighted the influential role of race, but the quantitative focus of his investigation lacked the depth of understanding made available through interpretive research protocols. The purpose of this study is to extend the work of Bailey by applying an interpretive approach to the study of representations of black and white masculinity in advertising. By doing so, a deeper and more nuanced understanding of masculinity may emerge.
Methodology
The author conducted a content assessment of advertisements featured in magazines specifically directed predominately at young white and black readers respectively. Content assessment is a qualitative research technique, which unlike content analysis, incorporates historical context into the analysis process.19 20 As noted by Phillips and McQuarrie21 , "a key advantage of content assessment is that it allows an integrated perspective, based on all of the elements of an ad, to emerge as a result of an extended period of immersion." As opposed to content analysis, wherein the researcher is bound by the contents of the analyzed text, content assessment provides the space for a more holistic examination.
Using self-reported magazine readership and subscription data reported in publisher-developed media kits, two groups of periodicals were chosen. The first group consisted of Vibe, King, and Black Men, while the second group included FHM, Maxim, and Blender. The former set having a predominately black male audience, and the readership of the latter group is composed primarily of young white males. Based on demographic data contained in each periodical's media kits, the readership of both sets of magazines was mainly college educated, between the ages of 20 and 35, and possessed an average household income upward of $50,000. Given the congruency of the readerships in primary social markers (i.e., age, education, and salary), the chosen periodicals provide for a comparable analysis of masculinity among young middle-class black and white males. The investigator conducted a content assessment of a total of 12 magazines—two issues for each magazine within the two groups. The magazine issues we analyzed encompass a time frame between April 2008 and July 2008.
The content assessment process incorporates three key areas of inquiry. The investigator assessed the variety of products advertised in each set of magazines. Given that men are the target audience for all the magazines, the investigator discerned the types of products deemed viable for advertisement to such a demographic. Furthermore, the investigator wanted to determine the extent to which different product categories were marketed along racial formations; that is, would the magazines aimed at young white males differ in their product assortment than those targeted to young black men?
The content assessment also evaluated the types of advertising appeals used in each group of magazines. To assist in this endeavor, the investigator developed a code sheet that explicitly outlined the potential advertising appeals. The code sheet included: rational appeal; four common emotional appeals22 —sexual, humorous, aspirational, and fearful; and an "other" category. Advertisements that simply presented product features and benefits were coded as rational appeal. In regards to the collection of emotional appeals, ads that displayed seductive imagery and/or sexually suggestive text were coded as employing sexual appeal. Ads that incorporated comical elements were coded as implementing humorous appeal. Those that presented images or textual communication that gave suggestion of increased social status were viewed as using aspirational appeal. Ads coded as using a fearful appeal incorporated images and text that aroused consumer anxiety. Advertisements that could not be placed in any of the aforementioned categories were categorized as other. The intent of this portion of the assessment was to better understand the ways in which products are constructed as desirable for men. The investigator also ascertained if/how configurations of desirability are augmented by race.
While the advertising appeal is determined by analyzing the creative portions of each ad in its totality, the final aspect of the content assessment examined the individual creative elements that constituted the whole of each advertisement. During this phase of the assessment, the investigator surveyed the gender, (phenotypic) racial identity, and social strata of models (as evident in style of dress and atmospherics present in the ad). Here the investigator was concerned with how gender, race, and class intermingle to describe and represent ideas of masculinity, as well as how these three constructs shift and transform themselves between the two target audiences.
The overall goal of the content assessment presented here is twofold. The first objective is to realize what constitutes present-day masculinity. By examining the product types directed at males along with the modes and means used to persuade young men of their utility, the investigator can assemble a snapshot of the attributes that currently formulate masculinity. The second aim of this research is to explore the contrasting representations of white and black masculinity. By focusing the investigation on magazines that speak to and for young black and white men, the researcher is able to clearly delineate between representations of black and white masculinity.
Findings
Variety of Product Categories
The two groups of magazines demonstrated considerable variance in relation to the variety of products advertised. The set of magazines targeted to predominately young white males generally displayed a greater mix of product categories. Fashion, automotive, personal electronics, fitness, cosmetics, alcohol, tobacco, and sex-related products23 were all well represented within the pages of FHM, Maxim, and Blender. While sex-related products constituted the greatest number of advertisements, as a whole this product category accounted for only 16 percent of all ads, which stands as a testament to the diversity of products featured. Conversely, sex-related products made up over 40 percent of all the ads featured in King, Vibe, and Black Men. That number climbs to 55 percent when Vibe is excluded from the analysis. The percentage of sex-related products was substantially lower for Vibe (15%); however, it should also be noted that Vibe maintains the lowest level of black/male readership—57% are black and 58% are male. Both King and Black Men have black/male readership higher than 80 percent. The magazine with the highest level of black male readership, Black Men, also demonstrated the highest percentage of sex-related products (77%). The increased product mix of Vibe may be a result of its more diverse (read: female and white) audience.
In addition to the influx in sex-related products, the magazines targeted to young black men also displayed a stronger concentration of automotive products, particularly automotive accessories, such as chrome wheels. While the product category of aftermarket wheels was nearly nonexistent in the magazines predominately directed at young white men, these ads were a fixture within the periodicals targeted at young black males. This is especially true for the pages of King in which one of every four advertisements featured aftermarket automotive products—an anonymous blogger may have said it best when they posted the following comment to King magazine's website: "I luv King magazine, T&A and rims!"
A deeper understanding of masculinity can be discerned from the variety (or lack thereof) of product categories within the two groups of magazines. The multitude of product categories found in periodicals predominately aimed at young white men indicates that middle-class white masculinity possesses a broader base than black masculinity. Middle-class white masculinity can be perceived as spanning across a great number of groupings and categories. In essence, no single product type typifies or dominates the structuring of middle-class white masculinity. Product categories as divergent as beer and batteries fit comfortably in the paradigm of white masculinity. However, the construction of middle-class black masculinity seems to be far more narrowly defined. The heavy concentration of sex-related products suggest that middle-class black masculinity is constructed around hypersexuality, while the focus on aftermarket automotive products, which act as symbols of conspicuous consumption, imply that middle-class black masculinity is aligned with highly visible materialism.
Product categories not present in the magazines also provide insight into the structures of hegemonic masculinity. Product categories related to domesticity, such as household goods and childcare items, were completely absent from both groups of magazines. This finding echoes the results obtained by Gentry and Harrison in their non-race specific content analysis of gender role representations. While demographic data pertaining to marital status and parenthood were not made available by all the periodicals under review, both Maxim and Black Men proclaim that one-third of their readership is married. The media kit provided by Maxim goes on to emphasize that 39 percent of their readers own their own home, which they proudly indicate is more than twice the level found among all adults in the U.S. The absence of advertisements for family and household products becomes more puzzling when these numbers are coupled with statistics provided by the U.S. government. According to the Bureau of the Census, men are typically married by age 27, and the National Survey of Family Growth conducted by the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention reports males assume fatherhood by the time they reach their 25th birthday. Given these figures, it is unlikely that the lack of household goods and childcare products can be solely explained by demographics.
The absence of products concerning the domestic (read: home and family) between racial formations intimates that neither black nor white middle-class masculinity is concerned with maintaining home or nurturing family. Rather, the featured product categories (particularly in the set of magazines aimed at predominately young white males) tended to join together under the concept of mastery/domination. The cross-section of ads featured in the magazines targeted to predominately young white men highlighted products and services (e.g., cars, cell phones, armed forces recruitment, and outdoor footwear) that possess an inherent element of connecting and managing points, people, places, and things in and outside the home. The combination of product categories that were and were not presented in each set of magazines illuminates a construction of masculinity wherein middle-class white manhood is disconnected from domesticity and broadly characterized around a plethora of objects and attributes concerning skillfulness, control, and pleasure. While middle-class black masculinity is also divorced from the domestic, it is situated within a narrower understanding that revolves around hypersexuality and materialism. These findings dovetail previous scholarship inasmuch as the positioning of hegemonic masculinity as masterly and masterful is well documented in masculinity literature.24 25 26 Using a race-specific analysis, however, resulted in findings about the distinct ways in which advertisements link middle-class white and black masculinity to skill and dominance. A study conducted by Harris et al.27 found that perceptions of masculinity among black and white men tended to be similar in young adulthood but that these perceptions progressively diverged as the men grew older. The differing paths used by advertisers to represent middle-class white and black masculinity may provide a deeper understanding of this phenomenon.
Advertising Appeal Usage
The two sets of magazines also differed greatly in their usage of advertising appeals. Sex appeal was employed far more within the magazines aimed at young black men. This finding is particularly surprising since sexual exploitation is the dominate theme in two of the three periodicals in both groups. While Blender and Vibe bill themselves as music-focused magazines, FHM, Maxim, King, and Black Men are all positioned as Playboy-esque; therefore much of the content surrounding the advertisements in these periodicals is sexually charged. That a continuation of the sexuality found in the articles and pictorials occurs in many of the advertisements featured in the magazines directed at young black men and that this continuation is absent in the predominately white periodicals speaks volumes in relation to the structuring of hegemonic masculinity.
Like the product category analysis discussed above, the examination of advertising appeals also indicates that middle-class black masculinity holds a reliance on hypersexuality for its meaning and structure. By depending on sexual imagery as a core means of persuasion, advertisers construct an understanding of middle-class black masculinity that largely manifests itself through high libidos and sexual conquests. The fact that far fewer ads in the magazines aimed predominately at middle-class young white males use sex appeal as a method of persuasion is another indication that middle-class white masculinity is connected to sexuality to a lesser degree than middle-class black masculinity. That is not to say that sexuality did not figure prominently in ads featured in Maxim, FHM, and Blender. Sex appeal was the second-most employed method of persuasion present in the set of magazines directed at young middle-class white men. In both sets of magazines, sex appeal was applied to an array of product categories. In addition to hedonic products, such as alcohol, tobacco, and high-end fashion, ads which are historically associated with emotionally based persuasion tactics, sex appeal was also present in many advertisements for utilitarian products, such as smoothies and website domains (Figure 1). This marketing strategy strongly suggests that heterosexual sex and heterosexuality command a prominent position in the formation of both white and black masculinity.
Figure 1. 
Use of Sex Appeal
View full resolution
As stated above, one other method of persuasion was used to a greater extent than sex appeal in relation to the periodicals predominately directed to young white males. While humor, fear, and an assortment of other appeals were featured in FHM, Maxim, and Blender, it was rational appeal that was used most frequently. Rational appeal was present in 157 advertisements in this set of magazines as opposed to the 55 occurrences found in Vibe, King, and Black Men. It should be noted that more than one appeal could be featured in the same ad; therefore in many instances advertisements highlighted a form of rational appeal in tandem with one (or more) of the other appeal types. This finding leads to the conclusion that the imagining of middle-class white masculinity contains a high degree of intellect and rationality. Since rational appeal was used to a far less extent in the ads featured in the young black male set of magazines, it would also follow that intellect and rationality are inconsequential attributes (at best) in relation to middle-class black masculinity. A review of the advertising appeals used within the two groups of magazines suggests that middle-class black masculinity is so leveraged by sexuality that it would cease to have meaning at all in its absence. The mobilization of appeals also illustrates that middle-class white masculinity is buttressed on a variety of characteristics; intelligence and logic, however, are situated at its core.
Deconstruction of Creative
While the investigator discovered key differences by analyzing the creative elements in their entirety, examining the individual pieces that comprised the whole of each advertisement further complicated these differences. Through this process, disparities in the ways that advertising appeals were implemented were realized. The two sets of magazines demonstrated significant differences in the employment of gender, race, and sexuality. These differences point to a deeper understanding of middle-class black and white masculinity. In regards to race, both groupings tended to feature models that matched the racial identity of their respective audience. The magazines aimed at young black men generally featured black models in their advertisements, while white models were typically present in the ads located in the magazines primarily targeted to young white men. Research from the field of psychology demonstrates that this practice aids in gaining and holding the attention of audience members.28 29 However, it also helps to distinguish between ideas of middle-class white and black masculinity. If the two were constructed equally there would be no need to use racial demarcation.
The usage of sexuality also differed greatly between the two sets of periodicals. While both sets of magazines relied heavily on heteroerotic imagery when employing sex appeal, the magazines aimed primarily at young white males also incorporated a sizable amount of ambiguous homoeroticism by featuring white and men of color in suggestive situations. Goffman posits that men in advertisements are generally positioned as standing upright, looking serious, and acutely aware of their surrounds, while women are typically portrayed touching themselves, off-balance, eyes closed, and sexually available.30 Sut Jhally argues that queerness results when these depictions are reversed31 —to present men in postures that are predominately associated with the female body is to disturb the appearance of heterosexuality. A number of advertisements in Maxim, FHM, and Blender used such a reverse and cross-coding, wherein men were displayed using codes linked to femininity or presented in a fashion that combined masculine and feminine codes (Figure 2).
Figure 2. 
Incorporating Queerness
View full resolution
This open yet subtle play on sexual orientation was not used in the set of magazines directed at young black men. The periodicals targeted to young black men situated sexual queerness to the furthest margins of print advertising: the classified section. Buried in the back of the magazine and alongside advertisements for psychic readings and diamond-encrusted "pimp" glasses, readers were privy to classified information—not all black men are heterosexual (Figure 3). Sporadically placed within the pages of the classified section of Vibe, King, and Black Men were advertisements promoting male-only, transgender, and/or gender-neutral phone sex lines. The obscure placement of these ads signals that, when it comes to expressing queer sexual identity, the only appropriate means of doing so may be on the "down low." While ads featuring heterosexual imagery were prominently displayed throughout the magazines, queerness was forced to the shadowy fringes. This configuration mirrors the dominant discourse concerning homosexuality in the black community, which asserts that queer black men live dual lives; one that is open and appears safely heterosexual and another that is hidden and dangerously homosexual—the famed "down low brothas."
Figure 3. 
Queerness at the Fringe
View full resolution
These incongruent depictions of male sexuality further explicate the formations of middle-class white and black masculinity. By prominently featuring advertisements coded with queer sexuality, the set of magazines mainly directed at young white men promote a more expansive form of masculinity. The act of coding queerness into the advertisements of well-known and respected brands has the potential to heighten the degree of normalcy associated with non-heterosexual identities. While the preponderance of heteroerotic imagery suggests that heterosexuality is the preferred mode of middle-class white masculinity, the openness with which homoerotic representations existed alongside them appears to demonstrate that the boundaries of middle-class white masculinity move beyond the limits of heterosexual identity.
Middle-class black masculinity, however, is not allotted the same fluidity. The advertisements in the set of magazines targeted at young black males indicate that heterosexuality is the only acceptable form of sexual identity. Queer sexuality formations must be disavowed and hidden from view. Rather than associating queerness with reputable brands, it is further marginalized by fastening it to the underworld of pornography. The disparate use of queer sexuality between the two groups of magazines gives the suggestion that middle-class white masculinity embraces a diversity of sexuality formations, while middle-class black masculinity actively excludes them. This disparity may be a consequence of the level of dependence each form of masculinity imposes on sexuality for their meaning and structure. Since middle-class black masculinity derives much of its construction from sexuality, and heterosexuality is its dominant form of expression, middle-class black masculinity may suffer a loss of meaning if other forms of sexual identity are openly recognized. In the case of middle-class white masculinity, however, sexuality is simply one of many constructing attributes, which may provide it the maneuverability to openly identify with queerness.
The employment and placement of women within the advertisements of both sets of magazines also served to elucidate the underpinnings of black and white masculinity. The ads within both groups of periodicals repeatedly deploy the use of objectification when featuring women. Many advertisements went beyond transforming women into objects and entered the realm of commodification, wherein women were positioned as the primary or supplemental good for sale (Figure 4). According to Nussbaum32 , to objectify a person is to: 1) treat a person as if they are interchangeable with other persons; 2) or treat a person as simply a means to an end; 3) or treat a person as if s/he is owned by another; 4) or treat a person as lacking agency; 5) or disregard a person's feelings and experiences; 6) or when acts of violence are treated as permissible upon a person. The practice of commodifying a person extends the objectification process by transforming a person into a product meant to be bought and consumed via the marketplace. This act is demonstrated in Figure 4, wherein a young woman of color comes to resemble the malted grain beverage presented for monetary exchange.
Figure 4. 
Commodifying Women
View full resolution
While all the magazines were securely positioned in sexism (the overwhelming representation of women was that of sex object), a key differentiator surfaced when race was added to the analysis. Women of color were nearly exclusively featured in the set of periodicals aimed at young black men, and when white women were presented they typically did not receive the same method of commodification. Whereas women of color were generally portrayed as a sum of sex organs and irrelevant body parts, white women were in large part depicted as more elite—a standard above other (read: non-white) objects of sexual conquest. Figure 5 accents the privileging of white femininity. While the white woman featured in the ad is clearly objectified in a sexual manner, she is also portrayed as a celestial being. Redmond33 notes: "Angels are where earthly, feminine-pure corporeality melts into air for the highest state of feminine being." Therefore, the representing of white femininity as angelic also positions it as the purest, most ideal form of femininity.
Figure 5. 
Privileging Female Whiteness
View full resolution
The same race distinction was not evident in FHM, Maxim, and Blender. Women of all racial formations were subject to representations that obscured their overall humanity in favor of emphasizing their sexuality. The ways in which race deviated the positioning of women suggests that middle-class white masculinity is structured in a manner wherein all women are valued as creatures (read: less than human) of carnal desire whose worth is proportionate to their level of attractiveness. However, middle-class black masculinity strays from this construction. The use of women in the ads featured in Vibe, King, and Black Men assigned a hierarchy; while all women were constructed as sex objects, white women were positioned as more desirable than women of color. As such, when calculating feminine worth, middle-class black masculinity uses sex appeal as a key indicator; however if race is not weighed equally, the worth of white women is positioned as greater than that of women of color. The intersectional analysis of gender and race infers that the devaluing of all women is a cornerstone of white and black masculinity. However, while white masculinity embraces equal opportunity chauvinism, black masculinity adheres to a hierarchical system in which whiteness is granted more merit. The final area of assessment was to deconstruct the atmospheric elements of each advertisement. This included an examination of fonts, colors, locales, as well as any other discernible characteristics that helped set the tone/mood of the ads. This process also uncovered differing components of middle-class black and white masculinity. Similar to the findings in association with the product category and advertising appeals analysis, the magazines targeted to predominately white young men contained a wide range of atmospherics. Some ads created a tone familiar to the mundane by displaying settings that mirrored everyday existence; others used elements like exotic locations, stylized fonts, and dark hues to provide for a more upscale mood; and some used abstract imagery, such as animation and disproportionate scaling, to create other-worldly experiences (Figure 6). The atmospheric diversity found in FHM, Maxim, and Blender enables their predominately young white male readers to navigate a multitude of affects while exploring these magazines.
Figure 6. 
Diversity of Atmospherics
View full resolution
The atmospherics of the ads featured in FHM, Maxim, and Blender, however, did appear to share three characteristics—they tended to adhere to white supremacist-capitalist-patriarchy.34 When present, a white man was generally positioned in the forefront of an advertisement. In the case of an ad featuring sex appeal, white men typically cohabited the forefront with one or more attractive women, with the women of the ad depicted as tending to the white man's needs/desires. Products were not simply presented for their direct benefits, but were instead positioned as gateways to particular lifestyles (e.g., Ray Bans as the portal for living the life of a rock n roll star; Figure 7). While the majority of white men highlighted in ads were not public figures, on occasions when men of color were prominently featured, they were typically celebrities or well-known athletes whose worth directly correlates with their ability to entertain predominately white audiences.
Figure 7. 
Product as Lifestyle
View full resolution
The atmospherics embedded into the ads found in Vibe, King, and Black Men (though more so in the latter two) created uniformity in tone/mood. The overwhelming majority of advertisements in this group focused on one of two senses of space—grandeur or urban chic. Those that combined elements of grandeur featured expensive cars, yachts, elegant homes, and exotic locales (along with beautiful women) as a means of creating an overall mood of sophistication and respectability. The ads that delineated an urban chic atmosphere did so by incorporating cityscapes and overtones of hip hop culture, such as graffiti art, hip hop vernacular, and rap artists as endorsers. As noted above, the ads in each set of magazines tended to present models that mirrored the racial identity of their respective audience. Therefore, black models were largely featured in both grandeur and urban chic advertisements.
The dichotomy of atmospherics is closely aligned with the dominant discourse of male blackness, which argues that black men have two modes of escape from the oppressive state they are born into—black respectability or street credibility.35 While both black respectability and street credibility adhere to the tenets of hegemonic social ideologies (i.e., patriarchy and capitalism), the two differ in how they operate within them. Black respectability places value on education and working within the systems of oppression to create change, while street credibility perceives the educational structure as suspect and uses counter-hegemonic practices (e.g., unlawful activities) as a method of self-betterment. The atmospherics associated with grandeur espoused the same virtues of black respectability—the "right" attitude coupled with the "right" education would lead to a well-paying legitimate occupation and a respectable life (Figure 8).
Figure 8. 
Emulating Black Respectability
View full resolution
Similarly, the urban chic atmospherics echoed the sentiments found in street credibility discourse—by staying "tru to the streets" one is free to reap the rewards associated with authenticity (Figure 9).
Figure 9. 
Selling Street Credibility
View full resolution
Conclusion
Through conducting a content assessment of magazines directed at predominately young black and white middle-class males, the investigator was able to discover a deeper understanding of middle-class white and black masculinity. By using an intersectional approach that incorporated gender, race, and sexuality, the unique tenets of black and white masculinity came to bear. Although both forms of masculinity are entrenched in sexism and patriarchy, the assessment demonstrated that they also possess distinctive characteristics. Middle-class white manhood is tied to a broad range of commodities, which enables middle-class white men to use more of the marketplace to assemble and to express their masculinity. Conversely, middle-class black masculinity is aligned with a narrow scope of goods and services, which greatly restricts how middle-class black men can employ the symbolic value of marketplace products to (re)construct and display their masculinity. This imbalance affords middle-class white manhood a greater level of autonomy than middle-class black manhood. Future research is needed to determine how advertising represents masculinity to black and white men that maintain other social positions, such as those that belong to the working class. Additional work should also be undertaken among white and black men so that the ways in which representations of masculinity express themselves in the lived experience of men can be realized.
Kevin D. Thomas  
Kevin D. Thomas is Assistant Professor in Advertising and Public Relations at The University of Texas at Austin. He investigates the socio-cultural impact of marketing communication and consumer behavior. His primary research interest pertains to understanding the relationship between marketing communication, consumption practices, and notions of self and community. Using a consumer culture theory (CCT) perspective, Kevin explores the ways in which identity markers (i.e. race, gender, class, and sexuality) are represented in marketing communication and experienced in the marketplace. Other areas of research interests include multicultural advertising, issues of diversity and marketplace discrimination, and entrepreneurship as a mode of empowerment among marginalized populations.

Contact Details
kevin.thomas@utexas.edu
The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Advertising & Public Relations
300 West Dean Keeton, A1200
BMC 4.774
Austin, TX 78712
References
1. Kimberle Crenshaw, "Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence Against Women of Color," Stanford Law Review 43 (1991): 1241-99.

2. Patricia H. Collins, Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness and the Politics of Empowerment (New York: Routledge, 2000).

3. The period of U.S. history between the formation of the Union until the Civil War (approximately 1789-1860).

4. Joseph Boskin, Sambo: The Rise and Demise of an American Jester (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007).

5. Deborah Gay White, "Jezebel and Mammy: The Mythology of Female Slavery," in Race, Ethnicity, and Gender: Selected Readings, ed. Joseph Healey and Eileen O'Brien (Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Pine Forge Press, 2007), 124-31.

6. Tara McPherson, Reconstructing Dixie: Race, Gender, and Nostalgia in the Imagined South. Durham: Duke University Press, 2003.

7. Ed Guerrero, Framing Blackness: The African American Image in Film (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1993).

8. Micki McElya, Clinging to Mammy: The Faithful Slave in Twentieth-Century America (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007).

9. John F. Kasson, Tarzan, and the Perfect Man: The White Male Body and the Challenge of Modernity in America (New York: Hill and Wang, 2002).

10. William M. O'Barr, "Representations of Masculinity and Femininity in Advertisements," Advertising & Society Review 7 (2006).

11. Jonathan E. Schroeder and Detlev Zwick. "Mirrors of Masculinity: Representation and Identity in Advertising Images," Consumption, Markets and Culture 7 (1) (2004).

12. Linda M. Scott, "Images of Advertising: The Need for a Theory of Visual Rhetoric," Journal of Consumer Research 21 (1994): 252-73.

13. Barbara B. Stern, "Masculism(s) and the Male Image: What Does It Mean to Be a Man? In Sex in Advertising: Perspectives on the Erotic Appeal, ed. Tom Reichert and Jacqueline Lambiase (Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2003).

14. James Gentry and Robert Harrison. "Is Advertising a Barrier to Male Movement toward Gender Change," Marketing Theory 10 (1) (2010): 74-96.

15. Linda T. Zayer, "A Typology of Men's Conceptualizations of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising," Advertising & Society Review 10 (2010).

16. Robert Brannon, "The Male Sex Role: Our Culture's Blueprint of Manhood, and What It's Done for Us Lately," in The Forty-nine Percent Majority: The Male Sex Role, ed. D.S. David and R. Brannon (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1976).

17. Linda Lindsey, Gender Roles: A Sociological Perspective (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1997).

18. Ainsworth A. Bailey, "A Year in the Life of the African-American Male in Advertising: A Content Analysis," Journal of Advertising 35 (1) (2006): 83-104.

19. Marion Marzolf, "American Studies—Ideas for Media Historians?" Journalism History (1) (1978): 13-16.

20. Carolyn Kitch, "Destructive Women and Little Men: Masculinity, the New Woman and Power in 1910s Popular Media," Journal of Magazine and New Media Research 1 (1) (Spring 1999), http://aejmcmagazine.arizona.edu/Journal/Spring1999/OLDspring1999C.pdf (accessed 22 October 2012).

21. Barbara J. Phillips and Edward F. McQuarrie, "The Development, Change, and Transformation of Rhetorical Style in Magazine Advertisements 1954-1999," Journal of Advertising 31 (4) (2002): 1-13.

22. Monle Lee and Carla Johnson. Principles of Advertising: A Global Perspective (Binghamton, N.Y.: Haworth Press, 2005).

23. The following items fall into the category of sex-related product: Hardcore pornography, softcore pornography, phone sex lines, penis enlargement supplements and equipment, male sexual enhancers, and sex toys.

24. Erving Goffman, "The Arrangement between the Sexes," Theory and Society 4 (3) (1977): 301-31.

25. Robert Brannon, "The Male Sex Role: Our Culture's Blueprint of Manhood, and What It's Done for Us Lately," in The Forty-nine Percent Majority: The Male Sex Role, ed. D.S. David and R. Brannon (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1976).

26. Ian M. Harris, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities (Bristol, Penn.: Taylor and Francis, 1995).

27. Ian M. Harris, Jose B. Torres, and Dale Allender, "The Responses of African American Men to Dominant Norms of Masculinity within the United States," Sex Roles 31 (11/12) (1994): 703-19.

28. Herbert Kelman, "Processes of Opinion Change," Public Opinion Quarterly 25 (1961): 57-78.

29. William J. McGuire, "Search for the Self: Going Beyond Self-Esteem and the Reactive Self," in Personality and the Prediction of Behavior, ed. Robert Zucker, Joel Aronoff, and Albert Rabin (New York: Academic Press, 1984), 73-130.

30. Irving Goffman, Gender Advertisements (Boston, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979).

31. Sut Jhally, "The Codes of Gender: Identity and Performance in Popular Culture," Media Education Foundation, DVD, retrieved 20 October 2012.

32. Martha C. Nussbaum, "Objectification," Philosophy and Public Affairs, 24 (4) (1995): 279-83.

33. Sean Redmond, "Thin White Women in Advertising: Death Corporeality," Journal of Consumer Culture 3 (2) (2003): 170-90.

34. bell hooks, Ain't I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism (Boston, Mass.: South End Press, 1981).

35. Edmund T. Gordon, "Gendered Culture: Black Male Culture," Working Paper, 2009.

Copyright © 2013 The Advertising Educational Foundation, Inc.
Advertising & Society Review
Volume 14, Issue 2, 2013

Research Areas
Social Sciences > Business and Society
Recommend
Email a link to this page
  
View Citation
Save Citation
Subject Headings
Men in advertising.
Masculinity in advertising.
Related Content
Advancing Singapore-China Economic Relations 
Advancing Singapore-China Economic Relations 
Oilfield Revolutionary: The Career of Everette Lee DeGolyer 
Oilfield Revolutionary: The Career of Everette Lee DeGolyer 
A Typology of Men's Conceptualizations of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising 
A Typology of Men's Conceptualizations of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising 
You have access to this content
Free sample
Open Access
Restricted Access
Welcome to Project MUSE

Use the Search box at the top of the page to find book and journal content. Refine results with the filtering options on the left side of the results page. Use the Browse box to browse a selection of books and journals.

Connect with Project MUSE

Join our Facebook Page
Follow us on Twitter
Project MUSE | 2715 North Charles Street | Baltimore, Maryland USA 21218 | (410) 516-6989 | About | Contact | Help | Tools | Order

©2014 Project MUSE. Produced by The Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Milton S. Eisenhower Library.