Dextrone, Scotland
HO 305/35

29.10.1971

Coroner's report

16yo male ran away from home (sick of authority), police asked by parents to find him

boy to appear at court after taking and riding a motorcycle

felt injustice, ran away again and drank poison - did not tell parents which coroner says is incidative of his rship to them. Parents blamed police. 

bought Dextrone through horticultural club and put his share in a bottle clearly marked poison. Coroner happy with the fact that it was properly labelled - boy would have taken anything to do the job. 

Father upset because would have preferred anonymity in how the newspapers reported it, suggesting that more people would take their lives in this way because of the reports. also upset by inconveneince of multiple journeys in bad weather to hearings. 

reporting of inquests always causes difficulties due to the editing of reports by the paper. Attitude of parents to reports is not logical. Publicity is demanded for allegations of police inefficiency but not for the true facts. 


it is of interest that the majority of reported cases of accidental prarquat poisoning have come from scotland where the inquiry is not held in public and the need for responsible labelling and care of the bottle is not brought to public attention. 


Mark Carlisle
...
statutory rules (coronoers rules 1953)  - every inquest must be held in public unless there are reasons of national security to compel a hearing *in camera*. No genera restirction on press reproting of inquests. This and other aspects of the law realting to coroners have been the sublejct of comprehensive reivew... Committee's recomendations call for a number of substantioal changes in procedure but at this stage Govt are studying report and awaiting views. 
...
liquid formulation highly prized, much less toxic pellet formulation available for home gardeners. Label gives warnings and recommendations, specialy warning on decanting into unlabelled containers. All recognise that however effective theese measures may be against the accidental use of the substnace these safegaurds may not be sufficient to deter someone who has the delibrate intention to poison himself by Paraquat or any other lethal poison to which he may be able to obtain access. 