
Directing Technology ed Ron Johnston and Philip Gummett
Croom Helm, London
1979

Brendan Gillespie
British 'Safety Policy' and Pesticides
p202-224

p204 - workers - manufacture, formulation and application
consumers
wildlife

concern with hasards to consumers and workers initiated govt action. In response to govt request, the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy appointed a Committee on Toxic Sustance in Consumer Goods to investigate threat to consumers from a number o fnew chemically based product. 
Growing concern after 7 deaths of ag workers 1946-50
Prof (later Lord) Zuckerman had chaired the CTSCG also chaired investigation into occ hazards of ag pesticides. 
3 reports - 1951 ,53, and 55 
Following a recommendation in the second report discussions were held to set a regulatory scheme. PSPS was formally set ip in 1957

distributors undertake to notify such new pesticides or new uses of pesticides to department before they are intoruced. 
to ascertain and disclose to Depts all info needed to enable Depts to advise on the precautionary measures which should be taken 
p205
not to introduce such products until agreement has been reached on the appropriate precautionary measures
to include the agreed precautions and the BSI common name (or chemical name) of the active ingredient on the label of every container of the product offered for sale and to take all reasonable measures to ensure that others concernsd are aware of and in so far as it lies in their power, observe the precautionary measures advised by the depts.
to notify any substantial change in text or layout of the label/ instruction leaflet of a product previously cleared
to withdraw a product from the market if recommended to do so by Depts, on the advise of the Advosry Committee on Pestiidse and other Toxic Chemicals followingg a review of the safe use of its active ingredient, provided that the distributor has been given every opportunity to make representations to Depts about their recommendations. 

flexibility = speed, pragmatism, case by case approach - all essential when controlling hazards assoc with a diverse technology such as pesticides. Involves considerable discretion to govt officials and some measure of industrial self regulation. 

PSPS is voluntary sheme. 

p206
in Britain, legislation is seen as generating rigidity and therefore to be avoided where possible. 

at every stage in the process, the notifier can negotiate with PSPS officials and advisors. No fixed data requirements which firms must supply. Detailed guidelines form the starting point for negotiation between the firm and the PSPS. 

advices on safe use is proffered to the govt depts participating in PSPS. views correlated by MAFF Pesticides Branc. May negotiate if ned over wording. 

stats for notifations 1964-1975
- clearances by the Quick Procedure increased during this time (75% of 172 in 1964, 93% of 538 in 1975) 
	emphasis on speed and informality, appreciated by the agrochemical mfcrs
- very low rate of refused clearances. The ratio of notification cleared to those received has consistently been above 95%
	- close dissucions that take place early on = will not submit a notification that will fail

p210
MAFF leading role, although other Depts are involved. MAFF Pesticides Brance which co-ordinates the views of other govt depts. Problem of controlling hazards assoc w pesticides unquestionably falls within MAFFs jurisdiction. 
PSPS located in the same laboratory as ACAS - Agricultural Chemicals Approval Scheme
officials of both shames employed n the Agricultural Development Advisory Service
 = responsible for dissemination of latest technical advances. Tait concluded that ADAS officials 'do not give the kind of advice which would lead to the reduction of pesticide usage'
 
 p211
 relationship of MAFF to regulates
 pesticide industry represented by trade assocs - e.g. British Agrochemicals Assocn BAA
 recognised by govt as sole representative and in return has agreed to maintain the industry side of the bargain. thus all firms which are members of BAA must submits their products to then PSPS notification procedure. 
 
 BAA's predecessor had participated fully in the establishment of the scheme to test the efficiency of pesticides in farming use - which became ACAS - in 1942, 15 years before PSPS. 
 
 farmers represented by NFU
 Ministry did not simply succumb to Union pressure, or develop a dependent relationship. Continuous contact with one powerful organisation induced a defensive posture in the Ministry which allowed the union to set the pace or hold it back. The unions views were not opposed by any other organised interest of comparable strength and access to a govt dept. 
 
 farmers have recognised the impt contribution chems have made to profitable farming, but they have hals been critical of pesticides (e.g. existence of scheme to test efficiency ACAS)
 
 p112
 Officals preferred to encourage compliance through persuasion rather than legal sanction. 
 professionally satisfying relationships, which assist the negotiation of safety with their regulates. 
 
 contrast with adversarial, police-type of relationship between regulators and regulates. 
 close and continuous contact between agchem industry and regulators and absence of other interest produced a prof and ideological identification between regulator and regulated. Consequently regulators defended regulatees under attack (as also aimed at how the regulation has been done)
 
  

