Social History Conference, Northumbria 2014
Economies strand
consumers

Ben?
dress - any accessories, as well as gardens
food and drink, non essentials, gingerbread, tea 
spending habits of servants

could order more goods than their years wages - did they mean to? what happened if they were sacked?


distinguished self form subordinates by consumption

tea textiles and timepieces

tea and sugar - habits, mass consumption, accompanied rising living standardsin 1840s and 50s
highest


inventories
new goods e.g. chocolate which also required more technologies (e.g. cups, other tableware)
house = comfort and sociability 

Sina
affluence and participation in post war boom
miracle years for consumption - seen in holidays, durable goods
pensioners profited above the overall growth in income - expansion of welfare state


need time to shop around for cheaper goods - any difference in the ability to shop around
oil crisis - limited resource, empty autobahn, insecurity
car owners ready to accept temporary restrictions 
4 car free sundays 1974, introduced speed limit for 6 months, didn't really do that much mainly symbolic
long term speed limit opposed by motorists

planning of superminis started before oil crisis, so not a response to, but the consumers preferences for more fuel efficient vehicles made them extremely popular


--------------------

a grant to help textile company promote goods abroad
Americans love the irish

american women better wives and mothers than irish
even low income families in the US can't do without domestic servant

unusual statements
pleated linen fabric - trademark
pleats required a lot of linen
native fabrics = irishness
irish photoshoots, castles celtic crosses in backgrounds
Jackie Kennedy connection
lace - motif sewn onto muslin, had to persuade the nuns to make it in a different colour other than black white and cream, but will have to check every statement that Sybil made about herself
Hollywood connections
nonsense - quite a bit of myth making
unpatriotic names, but very patriotic motivations and materials


---------------

entitled consumers, smart consumers
what underpins this - orgs? watchdogs? civil society, what role has the nation state/ regional govts?

not a grassroots movement, more of party politics and industrial  providing information for the users, including product testing [?? this sounds like it was really industry oriented, not independent, which is what the UK/US moved away from - why would German consumers have accepted this as a reasonable system, or what did the German firms do in their testing process that was different to gain their trust?]
 
consuming less ,thriftiness is more important in germany, lots of criticism about taking out credit.

