elizabth craig

1947 revised

cleaners and polishers
p51
various cloths and cleaners
metal and flor polishes, soap and soap flakes, scouring powders, disinfectant, ammonia and turpentine

p132
there should never be any need for special cleaning in toilet or bathrooms. They should be kept scrupulously clean all the time. 

stains
blood - paraffin, rinse then starch and water paste
choc and cocoa - borax
iodine - diluted ammonia
leather - tsp permanganate of potash dissolved in pint of water then dab soon on using clean cork or a medicine dropper. Wash in hydrogen peroxide if woollen, or lemon juice if cotton linen or silk. Wash with soapy water and rinse well. 

p134
paint - dip in petrol and rub vigourously
perspiration  - mthylated spirits
rust - chop and boil a clean stalk ofo rhubarb in a cup of boiling water until reduced by half. Boil the stained portion in this soon. 

tar - turps, wash in soapy water and rinse. 
tea - borax solution, then rinse or bleach with lemon juice. 

p141
sponges - soak in strong salt water. If very dirty dissolve tsp of permanganate of potash in quart of warm water and dabble the sponge in in it for 10 mins, then rinse. 

p199 illustration of bottles inc poison - invariably identified



--------------Keeping house with Elizabeth Craig
1936
p210
list of cleaning materials dn a stain removers
carpet soap, soap flakes and soda
floor, metal and furniture polishes. 
ammonia meths, turps, vinegar, linseed oil and paraffin
Borax, glycerine, starch etc. 

p212
daily housework
to clean bathrooms - rub grease makes with cloth dipped in apponia or a wet rag dipped in borax. If stained , rub with a wet rag dipped n whiting. Wash, dry and polish. 
Lv basin, bidet and WC - remove grease spots in same way. Wash, dry and polish outsides. If WC is neglected use a cleanser sold for removing old stains. 

p218
spring clean bathroom
remove stains with spirits of salts or cleaner specially prepared for the purpose. Rub any deposit left on the side of bath with wet cloth dipped in strong borax, or with softer whiting. 

p224 ABC of cleaning
baths - enamelled - grease and dirt makes rubbed with ammonia
porcelain - soapy deposits with wet rag dipped in borax. clean with wet rag dipped in whiting
zinc - warm soapy water, or whiting/ powdered bath brick. Rinse, dry and polish with a greasy cloth

section on borax uses  )nothing about where to get borax, or the amounts it comes in as the amounts used here are quite substantial) 
p236-237
allow 2 tbs to 1 gallon hot water unless otherwise stated
rinse bread and cake containers 
rinse coffee and tea pots daily Boil coffee pots weekly with borax, rinse thoroughly 
1tbs to gallon of hot water for washing china glass and silver. If water is v hard, add a little to the rinsing water. 
enamelware and sinks- dip brush or mop in dry borax instead of usual household cleaner. rub til clean, then wash in clean water. 
wash glazed sinks with hot hoax and water, and a little dry borax sprinkled on a damp cloth. 
drain pipes - daily flush  2 heaped tbs on grate, then pour over hot water
regrigs - wash and scrub with hot water and borax, 1 tbs to 1 quart water
rinse garbage tins, once a week. 
dust and rub with a chamois leather wrong out of borax and water to clean windows nd mirrors. 

