Dear Jules, 

August bank holiday seems so long ago, I should have emailed right away to talk about bicarbonate of soda, and other things. I was mainly feeling snot filled and sorry for myself, combined with a hefty dose of self-directed anger for not being more assertive and saying that we shouldn't go through the locks, that it would put pressure on you getting to the train. 

Ryan told me about Sadie being admitted to hospital, I hope that you have heard positive news since then and that Sylvia is not worrying too much. Such a complicated set of things to deal with. I hope you and Graham are both well. The prison where my Dad works is being shut (you might have heard it mentioned on the news - Blundeston, new superprison earmarked for Wrexham, but everyone being shipped off to other prisons around the county immediately), so he's looking for other work as it'll be closed in December. He's trying to see the positive side of it but is pretty fed up.  Rita still has some hours as a relief housekeeper with the Landmark trust, and is waiting to hear back about one of the last minute free staff stays at Landmark property - http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/search-and-book/properties/goddards-8013  this weekend.  If it comes off there'll be a bit of a family and friends gathering (her friend Alison who she met on a gardening course, her husband Stephen who is a thatcher, schoolfriend Catherine and her husband Patrick some kind of media types - they live nearby so might not stay over, sister Ana-Luisa and husband Simon, Hecti (my grandpapa). There will be dogs. Would you and Graham like to come if it goes ahead? 

We're back in London again - not sure if Ryan told you that we're mooring in Limehouse over winter - so we've been back up that flight of locks you helped bring us down.  The boat is painted and the engine has been serviced, though we are keeping an eye on a Very Important Bolt that is tricky to get into the right position and has been causing trouble for the last few weeks, as well as some troubling excess oil/diesel in the bilge. 

I said I'd write about the chemicals that I've been researching so that you'd know more about what I was doing. Some of them do have strong ICI connections, so people in your social circles may have insight. 

Paraquat - this is one of my two garden chemicals. It was manufactured in Widnes for quite a while and sold in a strong agricultural formulation and a much weaker kind for use at home called Weedol. I'm focusing on the weaker version, though am still interested in general background concerning the agricultural grammoxone. I think the Catalyst science centre in Widnes might have some material in their archives relating to this. 

Sodium chlorate - another garden chemical, but one that I think (so far anyway) has possibly been sold under more brand names than paraquat, because it is older and not licenced by a company like ICI. Sometimes other weedkillers are marketed as not containing sodium chlorate, perhaps for not remaining active for as long as that chemical can, or perhaps because sodium chlorate as a plain, unbranded, and possibly less expensive chemical was available to buy "as is". It is also explosive, favoured by small boys making bangers. 

Carbon tetrachloride - this was a dry cleaning type chemical, the brand that  I've found most information on has been Thawpit, which were trying to position their product as not just for spot-cleaning stain removal, but for full garment and accessory freshening. It did not catch fire or smell as bad as petrol, but the fumes did have noxious effects, being especially fascinating to children with some unfortunately tragic outocmes, and some workers are described as addicted to the fumes. 

Bicarbonate of soda, baking soda - I got some fabulous American booklets from one of the manufacturers of bicarb, promoting all the non-cooking uses, but have not found anything similar from UK manufacturers, nor many of the non-cooking and non-medicinal uses are suggested in household manuals, home ec books, or housework columns in newspapers and magazines. I wonder if this remained an American use and British households stuck to washing soda. 

Washing soda - have not actually got very far with this at all. I'd be interested in finding any kind of promotional material, packaging or brand names of products that are principally washing soda but sold for a particular use, or somehow disguising the fact that its washing soda. I think preparations like Harpic replaced washing soda solutions for tasks like cleani

Household ammonia - Scrubbs and Sprim are two brands I've found so far, as well as unbranded household ammonia. Ammonia interests me because it's used in stain removal a lot, and their promotional material seems to suggest it can be used for all manner of household cleaning tasks, as well as personal hygiene. The absence of ammonia in some products is highlighted, so I want to know why and when household ammonia went out of fashion. 

I think from the paragraphs above, you can tell where I've done most research... 

For all of them, I'm looking for promotional material - adverts, point of sale displays, and packaging. I will be doing an oral history strand (which I still have to get ethics approval for) but this is where I think the users side will best come out, as so far I have not encountered very much written about what these things were actually like to use, or why people did or didn't use them, or whether they found them becomming harder to get hold of and whether they minded. This kind of stuff might even be too banal for Mass Observation diaries (which I should probably look at).

 



