Daily Mirror
Jennifer Kenyon paraquat case
Love bites made me a poisoner
p 3 July 9 1974
two cups of tea laced with Gramoxone, a weed killer containing deadly paraquat. 

discovered husbands lovebites 0230 am
I decided to buy some substance
that morning asked Roberts if he could get her som paraquat and he told her he would arrange it. 15 minutes later she went with a friend to a who p owned by Robert's employers and collected bottle. 
4.30 poured tea.

uses Gramoxone 3 times to paraquat once


Letters
Daily Express 6 Aug 1974  p3
Read the label
re. case of a Staffordshire man who used paraquat to spray greenfly on an apple tree and asimliar case with a starwbetrry grower. I would like to make it absolutely clear that Paraquat is a weedkiller, not an insecticide and should never be used under any condition to control insects. It should be emphasised that growers always use paraquat as a very diluted spray. Problems only arise when the concentrated chemical is accidentally or inadvertently swallowed. This concentrated version called Gramoxone is only available to professional farmers and grower. It is illegal to sell it to amateur and every accidental death that has occurred has been caused by people flouting the clear warning on the label. ICI is concerned that the difference between Gramoxone as used by growers and Weedol for safe use by gardeners is fully understood. 
tRL Waring Sales director, ICI plant Protection Limited. 

Daily Express July 13 1974
PAraquat's toll of 97 victims
James Davies
no known antidote never before been used as a murder weapon.
back room scientist Bill Boon. most effective weedkiller of all time. 
mostly children were being poisoned after drinking it by mistake. horrified doctors could find no antidote. 
Since March 1 this year Groamoxone has been on the home Office Poisons List. This means that it can only be sold to people who can prove that they need it for recognised purposes and they have to sign a poisons register. Jennifer Kenyon using a false name found a way to get hold of enough gramoxone to kill a whole village. 

02.Jan.1965
WEedol mentioned in gardening column (Xenia field)
gamma rays for new chysanths
promising new weedkiller - Weedol - real break trhouh product. ineffective on touching soil. Chemists nd scientists - real fit burn in up as effectively as a flame gun. wizard weedkiller
precise application. we shall have to learn to use it wisely and skilfully. It will be available in the spring. ICI pP are to be congratulated on this exciting introduction 


Only one advert in 1968

