Higgens
Add 83210
1949 - nothing in here, a gum arabic + rosewater thing to be painted onto a plate, dried and flaked off. Food?


Add 83220

feb 6 Tues
turned out cupboard near drawing room, scrubbed it  + whitewashed it
Feb 7 Wed
turned out cupboard in passage
Feb 9 Friday
painted kitchen windows and sink, looks much better

feb 10 sat
painted bathroom window

feb thurs 15
went shopping in Eastbourne with Ruby
have planted shallots beans parsnips

sat feb 17
sowed fettuce

mon 19
planted leeks and more beans 6 wonderful cloch arrive from Elphiek

sat 24 feb 
still v cold but fine putt peas under cloche and potatoes in seed box

sat 3 march 
snowing walter has put in my peace rose snowing all day

sun 4 march
snowing all night beautiful took photos of Walter Nick and Blotto
6 march tues
Mrs Dewhurst sent note not coming any more [to help clean?]
wed 14 march
sharp frost impossible to put seeds in garden

tuesday 20 March
Margery Piper came to help v good and quick

Wed 21 Mar
Margery Poper came to help stayed for lunch

tues 27 Mar
MP came this morn

wed 28 
MP came this morn

3 april tues
pouring w rain [ul]no margery[ul]

wed 4 apr
margery came this morning cleaned out Q's room (either Q or G) stayed for lunch

wed 18
diana rang to say that Margery would not come again as she had slight blood pressure I am very sorry .

Monday 23 apr easter mon
walter finished putting in potatoes

sun 29 apr
Frank [fixing mother's house] inquiring about grant for bathroom and loo 

friday 4 may
letter from mum saying she does not want bathroom and loo yet, cannot bear more dirt and muddle

wed 9 may
Miss Guiness ad D Grant here in time for lunch
busy all day preparing house

30 may
letter from water board to say I could have grant.  Frank nearly finished work putting in new sink unit

thursday June 21 
had new potatoes and peas from our own garden for lunch

Sunday 24 June
someone has gone into Berwick church and poured black stuff over the three figures painted by Vanessa Bell round the pulpit between 4 and half 4 this afternoon

Monday 25
suspicion on two old ladies hovering in churchyard. Perhaps mad? 

wed 27 June
Walter hoeing and watering. D Grant asked Walter to cut grass in orchard.

mon 2 july
everything in the garden dying for want of rain. 
scrubbed walls in the bathroom and painted it in the afternoon, looks clean

fri july 6
planted sprouts and broccoli in garden
men came to paint house outside
police refused amyrilis permission to make pancakes in the street
 tues 10 
 a lovely rain thank goodness, not very much but enough to freshen flowers and veg
 thurs 12 july 
 rained all night planted out leeks with Walter
 sat 14
 [people leaving house]
 stayed in + did washing
 July 24 tues
 distempered larder looking very nice
  monday 30 july
  very busy cleaning
  wed 1 aug
  painters finished outside, looks very nice. wish something could be done inside
  fri 3 aug
  John sent me the photos I took and he had developed
  wed 8 
  a nice day
  worked like a slave all day cooking and cleaning
  [before going to Norfolk]
  Monday 20 
  returned to sussex house disgustingly grubby masses of carnations and sweetpeas Blotto pleased to see us
  Tues21 aug
   Had Jimmy in the morning, cleaned through all the rooms
   wed 22 aug
   very busy cleaning, quentin arrived in time for dinner
 sat  25 aug
   amyrlis and henrietta  coming for weekend in time for lunch
   terribly busy day very tired
 sun 26 aug
 very busy my legs ached dreadfuly
 mon27
 amaryllis hernia and quentin left on 10 o'clock train thank goodness
 busy cleaning up behind them
 sat 22 sept
 I distempered my sitting room out, I am terribly tired
 fri 12 oct
 walter finished picking up his potatoes
 
 thurs 18 oct
 i fell in mr bell's bathroom I twisted my foot and fingers quite painfull .... foot and hand swollen
 lovely hot afternoon
 fri 19
 my hand very swollen and painful
 
 25 thurs oct 
 frigidaire man brought and repaired cracked side of frigidaire
 
 friday 9 november
 walter dug the herbaceous border
 
 monday 12 novermber did front borders
 
 
 notes p 130 recto
 calcon water softener
 [apparently unrelated to anything]
 just past wellington road graveyard
 st john wood for acacia road
 attempted spellings of ordanance road
 
 
 add 83228
 1969
 friday 21 feb
 certificates for my ICI shares and I took them to the bank
 sat march 15
  walter put broad beans in the wall garden 
  March 20 I feel tired so tired quentin and Richard shone for lunch, Balck Tony and friends los of tea and Angelica turned up from France my feet ache and I feel old, Walter is so good washing up etc. my film came back form kodak a complete washout. 
  
  mon 24 march
  walter put in shallots and peas fumes still coming from aga
  tues 25 mar
  transplanted rockery plants from wall garden into rockery infant of house
  wed 26 mar
  walter put in carrot snap leeks
  Louise Ford sent a man to service aga. did my washing and spindlier refuse to work.
  thurs 27 mar
  a very smart young man came the evening to repair my washing machine
  sat 29 mar
  walter and i put lupins n wall garden in the morning
  apri 2
  walter digging iris border
  cleaned and polished rooms and prepared beds
  aoruk 23
  dandy on heat
  I put flower seeds in garden and walter put in scarlet beans + dwarf beans also lettuce
  april 24
  polished floors
  may16 i put turnip sunflower and zinnia seeds in 
  may 18 took my film to be devloped
may 30 busy cleaning
wed june 4
did my washing and washed my hair
june 9 sent off proxford film to be developed
june 10 did my washing and ironing  
jun 16
i put wallflowers canterbury bell and stock seed in the garden my film of girls autumn club having tea and north end farm proxford and of ethel  _ roll _ nigel _ jan is good. 

july 18 friday
polished studio and lower bedroom + pulled up the dead hedge round lawn in wall garden  + put in cuttings
july 29  
I am so tired I wish walter and I had a little cottage of our own. rained on and off all day,Walter put leeks in the garden
august 18 
walter busy in the garden weeds everywhere and flowers broken down by rain while we were away 
22 august
the strachey ladies said how sad the death of leonard woolf was but he could not read or garden since his last stroke and was unconscious fro days before he died he must have been unhappy poor man he was 88 yrs old. I wonder what will happen to his lovely garden. 
29 augst
did my washing + ironing _ washed through passages
3 sept
did my washing and scrubbed though passage



  sleeping pills mentioned several times in previous, this time John brings them for her, no doc involved?
  
  
  
  
  
  
  ADD 83244
  Dairy Diary 1982
 p 18-p21  
  
  safety in the home spread - last section p19 on avoiding poisoning, mostly to do twith medicines - but points 9 and 10 about household celling agents well away from reach of children and away from foodstuffs
  never put household cleaners disinfectants etc into squash or wine bottles they are best kept in their original labelled containers. \ standard rospa logo  after section on electricity and wring 
  
  consumer rights focus
  
  stain removal kit p p34 (
  liquide grease solvent - eg beaucaire, k2r, dabitoff thawpit 
 Label all solvents and keep them out of th reach of children.  read and follow mfcrs instruction exactly. many solvents are highly inflammable sower in a well ventilated room, never use near a naked flame or smoke when using. 
 laundry borax, glycerine, hydrogen peroxide, household ammonia, methylated sports, white vinegar |9or acetic acid)
 household bleach (chlorine) 
 proprietary rust/iron mould remover e.g. Movol
 amyl acetate - highly flammable and toxic so don't breath in the fumes and keep the weirdos open. Obtainable form some chemists. 
 
 