Dangerous Drugs act does appear to be connected to chemicals that are not drugs.

please arrange for police officers when carrying out their inspections in connection with the DDA to satisfy themselves that retailer are aware of and conscientiously carrying out the modified arrangements. They should be requested at the same time to furnish a report of cases where they find non compliance for forwarding to this office
HM Inspector f Explosives 

this is in relation to HO circa 816001/43 

extensive use of sodium nitrate by gardeners 2 April 43

13 April
seedsmen, sales of nitrates
identity cards
horticultural and cooperative socks obtaining nitrates without re odds being forwarded to the office a possibility
obtain of me the names and address of hot sox. 


29/4/43
inspr rolfe said that retailers in oxford city refused to sell any of the substances which might be used for sabotage as they would rather not be bothered with completing the forms. 

questions about "known customers"

875,082/2
11/8/41
issue of certificates - 
i do not suppose the volume of work involved will be great; but it may be a rather delicate job particularly as the scheme is without legal basis. 
the question is whether his burden on the police is justified by the importance of the scheme. Do not imagine it would be possible to devise an effective scheme which involved less work for the pollce and presumably MI5 and Explosives branch are satisfied that it is of real importance to improve this degree of control of the substances concerned. 
...
chemist being a responsible professional body can no doubt be relied upon for the most part to do faithfullwhat they are asked to do. Whether some of the garage proprietors etc who are also affected will do so seems far more doubtful. But obviousy their part in the shame is of far less importance that the chemist or perhaps any gaps they may cause will not be so important as seriously to weaken the effectiveness of the scheme as a whole. 


19 March 1941
German gent recently arrived in this country presume sabotage had instructions to go to chemise shops and purchase the following substances 
potassum permangangate
sulphur
potassium chlorate
saltpetre
sodium chlorate

known as bulk drugs. 
wholesaler prepared to sell 28lbs a time
no doubt if wholesaler or retailer were invited to supply all fibre substances the enquiry would regarded as suspicious. 

15 Feb 39
875082/1
Committee of Imperiacl Defence
precautions against sabotage in war time control of sale of certain chemicals
minutes
at first sight the proposals seem quite impracticable in some cases - e.g. sulphuric acid wis used in the battery of every motor car.
As regards poisoning it would be fantastic to require any medicine continuing any of the poisoning named to be supplied only on a doctors' prescription. e.g. aspirin contains salicylic acid (which anyhow can be made from carbolic acid, which is used in every household).
Moreove the policing of the Poison Board has always been to keep the number of poisons available only on  a medical prescription down to the minimum not to hamper legitimate use . I am doubtful whether th PB machinery is even appropriate for securing a record of every retail sale of any of these poisons whether plain or compounded in something else. If special restrictions have to be imposed for war policy, it would probably be better to act under Defence regulations.   6.3.39

