Ho 45/11240

426759
10 Aug 1922
Sale of industrial preparations of Arsencic
newspaper report containing paper read by him before the BMA. Feels sure HO will agree that an alteration in the law is desirable


I agree that something she be done to regulate the sale of poisonous weedkillers etc. 
I do not think it wd be practicable or necessary to restrict sale to regd pharmacists: but to manufacturers and shop keepers who deal in these things have to be registered under the act of 1908 and they might now be required to keep records of sales ass chemists are in the case of poisons. This wd need legislation. I think also that purhcasers should require a police permit to purchase: but I dobut if it wd be possible (as suggested withn) to impose conditions as to storage etc and to enforce them effectively

Notes in margin
Clearly  not, Sec 2 was passed because the previous limitation of the sale to pharm chemists was found to be a great inconvenience and to have harmful results. 

So far as arsenic is concerned they already appear to be required to do so by the Arsenic Act 1851

IT will seem a little anomalous to reqruie a licence for the purchase of substances excepted by Sec 2 from the restrictions of the Ph Acts, and not to require one for the same poisons when sold under this Acts.

? Ask min of Agricultre for their observations [?] on the proposal to limit the right to purchase and be in possession of the substances to which sec 2 of the ph act 1908 applies to persons who have obtained a licence or permit from the police 
2710 22

-------------

426759/19
Sir M Delevingue
1. Our information as to the history of Sec 2 is contained in 107, 339. It was based on the recommendations of a Committee on Poisons appointed by PCO in 1902 - see point of report in The bill was drafted by PCo and sent out to HO for observations. The HO attitude was rather detached. Mr Samuel was in charge of the Bite in the Commons but he took pains to explain that he was actuating as representative of the PCO in the Commons not as Under SoS (see debates on HO Affairs for 1908 Vol III p 1721). He also impressed on the House that HO did not deal with questions of poisons and had no control over the PBO.  It is clear from the Report of the Committee and Mr Samuels speech that the reason for sec 2 was simply that the use of various poisons had become indispensable to farmers and gardeners and that it was too inconvenient to them to confine the sale to chemists. 
2. I cannot hear of any trade organisations that could be consulted as weedkillers can usually be bought either of ironmongers or of florists not to mention the large store +c. it is a priori unlikliey that there would be any combineation covering gthe trade generally. The M of Agricutlure know of none. They say that they consult the Insecidie CCommittee of the Chamber of Horticulture but this represents **üsers**
3. I don't think I can add anything to the minutes on 426, 759/19. I confess I do not feel very ?? about materially reducing the danger by restitution on sale and purchase. : as long as those poisonous preparations are in common use and therefore always in the hands of farmers and garden owners in considerable quantities it will always be difficult to prevent propel who really want to commit a murder from obtaining and using them. AJE 27.10.22


426759/41

It seems undesirable that HO circulars she be given publicity in most cases, especially where as in this case they deal with administrative amusements wh may affect as potential offenders the people to whom they would be shown. 
I have however ascertained from the PCPO that the Ph Society have printed HO circular in the PH Journal. Presumably therefore some at any rate of the Margate Chemists while have seen it. I don't think it matters much in the present case but we might perhaps suggest semi-officially to the PCO that if there she be any similar circulars issues in future they should in communicating them to the Ph Soc ask the latter not to publish them without specific permission from the PCO who wd pressmable consult HO. 

Note in margin 
Mr Nethercoat consulted us officially before hand and I told him I saws no objection 


