Housewife
Ann Oakley

4 cases studies of housewives - 
Patricia Andrews - doesn't like it when her husband does the housework if she's ill - not done right. 
p113 Also isn't keen on the idea of a man staying at home to look after the children while the wife works "I'd think the man was a bit funny, wouldn't you? Lazy sod" despite saying that housework is hard, and disagreeing with her husband thinking that she has "a lovely life" a "cushy life" as a housewife. 
doesn't say anything about chemicals. She lives in a small flat, doesn't drive and her husbands wages only just cover the rent bills day to day living expenses.

Juliet Warren
'we've got lots of wood and lots of antiques which desperately need polishing and I do polish them but I don't do them as much as I used to before I had the baby.' p116
not keen on cleaning anymore, used to feel satisfaction to get it all done while working but having all day to do it, everyday makes it far less appealing. 
no mention of chemicals or brands

Margaret Nicholson 
impression of being a very satisfied housewife.p127
p128 - taking refuge in her felinity, a v impt quality of her. role of housewife as haven followin an academic failure which afforded her self-confidence. Housework has a value as an index of femininity - just as involved as Pat Andrews, but her standards and routines are different, as though she is asserting her individuality in the way she does housework. 
130 - has a domestic help 2 days a week. Mrs James is v nice and every Monday she makes up all the beds for me and I really appreciate that. I hate making beds...
don't like washing up - tiresome crops up all day long yet not justified in asking for a dishwasher as not enough washing up. 
I haven't got a washing machine as I don't want one. Send out sheets, laundrette for towels and pillowcases, but couldn't put children' clothes in machine - ruined. all husband's hirts by hand - satisfaction. 
p132 I don't have terribly high standards, except perhaps for keeping the loo and the basin clean. I rather do things with Vim than dust and polish and I supposed that's part of the same hygiene thing. It does worry me underneath about the kitchen if the gas cooker top is dirty and if the sink's dirty, and the fiords. It makes me feel guilty n that it should b done. .. Peter used to complain that the place was too tidy ad neat, and that I was too fussy.

Sally Jordan - polishing's alright, you just spray it on p146

interviewed 1971, published 1974/76

it might have just been an effect of the interviewing, or Oakley's interests, but there was very little on chemicals or environment, or even the technologies of housework beyond washing machines (quite a bit of variation in laundry work), mainly on the identity of houswife and the satisfaction or dissatisfaction associated with the role. 