Household encyclopaedia
p8 acid on clothes - to counteract effects, immediately moisten spot with spirits of ammonia

p36 boracic acid or boric acid - ointment, antiseptic (Borax does not appear)

p46 burns from acids - immediately wash with limewater, carbonate of soda and water, whiting and water, or chalk and water. Then apply th emixture of chalk and oil. For burns from sulphuric acid bathe with linseed oil for 10 mins. 
burns from lime - after bathing with vinegar and water, apply chalk which has been mixed with linseed oil to a thin paste. 

aluminium pan, burnt - half filling pan with water into which odd bits of rhubarb have been put. Boil 15 mins. 

p60
carbolic - this is a strong disinfectant and poison - esp in its fluid form. Great care should be taken to label any bottle containing this fluid so that it may not be mistaken for medicine. Carbolic powder is the safer form for household use. 

p92 deodorising sinks etc
pour down a solution of household ammonia or permanganate of potash in water

p96
doorsteps - to keep free from ice add a cupful of meths to every pailful of water

p129
grease spots - to remove from fabrics
eucalyptus oil will remove grease or oil from any fabric howsoever delicate without the slightest injury to the material
or sprinkle spot with talc place a clean dry cloth over it and press with an iron. 

p149
iodine stains
carbolic will entirely remove the stain without injury to the most delicate fabric. Get your chemist to give you a pennyworth of 1 in 40 strength carbolic, put the stained part in a saucer and simply pour the carbolic over, the mark will ad once disappear. 

p185 further explanation of carbolic and mice
pure carbolic acid - saturate rag. Acid kills the vermin by consuming the flesh and obviates the odours arising from decomposition. 

p222-223 
mostly the same 
acetic acid
aconite, monkshood or blue rocket
alcohol
alikalis (potash soda ammonia) 
arsenic
bitter almonds
carbolic acid 
chloral
chloroform
coal gas
copper
deadly nightshade (belladonna)
foxglove
fungi
hemlock
hydrochloric acid
laburnum
laudanum, opium, morphia
lead
mercury
mushrooms
nicotine
nitric acid
oxalic acid (acid of sugar)
paraffin oil
phosphorus
prussic acid
salts of lemon
spanish fly, blistering fluids, 
spirits of salt
strychnine 
sugar of lead
sylphic acid (oil of vitriol) 
turpentine
yew figs and fruit

p244
chloride of lime is very effective at driving rats and mice out, but must be put i na metal container as it destroys almost anything it touches, limes also effective at getting rid of silverfish

p245 removing shine from navy-blue clothes
sponge with a little vinegar and warm water. The same results can be obtained with petrol or ammonia. 

p274
soiled arms of chairs - rub with flannel and petrol, use a circular movement and do it in the open air if at all possible, at any case not in a room with gas or a fire going. 

p281
sponges - wash with either vinegar or tartaric acid, then runse
or dissolve 1 tbs sea salt in 1 quart hot water, soak until cold then rinse
or ammonia and hot water, leave for 12 hours then rinse and squeeze in running hot water. 
p282
rubber sponges - dissolve 0.75 oz bicarb of soda in 0.5 pint tepid water and place sponge in solution. leave then rinse. 

p315 benzine to clean vellum

p332
bicarbonate of soda is useful for cleaning woodwork but you must rinse the woodwork at once with clean water and not allow the bicarbonate to dry on. 

p282
stains - to remove from mahogany rub with a cork dipped in a little oxalic acid or aqua fortis, then thoroughly wash
p283
precaution in using petrol et
before starting to remove a stain with petrol or any other liquid cleaner first damp the material with the cleanseg agent rougd the outside, then work inward. Itherwise the stain will spree as the dam part grows bigger. Any operations with petrol should be done in the open. 

stains on leather - spirits of wine
to remove grease from silk take a lump o f magnewsia and rub it wet on the grease spot. Wen dry, wash off and the mark will have disappeared. 
to remove an ink stain from light carpet or woollen, rub with ordinary fruit salts mixed in a little meths. 

p283  iodine, rub with freshly cut lemon
iron mould - cover stain with salt, then lemon juice, rinse in weak soon of ammonia, wash in clean water
medicine stains - from silver or electroplated spoons wipe with a rag moistened with a drop of sulphuric acid. Protect hands. Then wash in warm soapy water and rinse throughly. 
p285 tar stains from carpet - fullers earth and turps, rub into stain and allow to dry then brush vigour sly. 
stains tar - latd will remove tar satns from all kinds of materials. Rub into the stains then wash material in the usual way 

