Industrial research in the british photographic industry 1879 - 1939
Edgerton

p106
this article points out that r&d/resources of firms can feedback into the long term performance of industries and nations. 

firm level is the best way to understand history of r&d in British industry. 

photographers had to prepare own emulsions, develop and print until the 1870s - ready to use material was not available

p107
Germany - dyestuff firms supplied photographic chemicals to photographic companies, then set up their own production facilities for photographic products
Agfa - by 1913 30% of their turnover was photography based - plates, film
Bayer - mfc developers and fixers in 1902, then moved to papers 

US dominated by large firms, UK mainly small independent firms who
p108  
 supplied plates and papers to professionals and serious amateurs.
 firms did not produce chems or cameras, or the raw materials that went into the photographic materials
 dependent on German chemical industry. 
 
 {However, I argue that some of the UK firms did  - see Woolley's who sold chems, then cameras, and JT Chapman who also invented reliable plates, sold chems and cameras. }
 
 p109
 photography not an appealing career choice for chemistry graduates - employed by companies like Ilford for routine testing, not research & development, although they were offered rewards for the development of new products to any of their staff. 
 
  (no mention of users, consumers so far although p110 Ferdinant Hurter from United Alkali Company did carry out private research on sensitivity of dry plates 1870 with a colleague, which although the article doesn't mention, could be the result of being an interested amateur photographer)  

p118
British Photographic Research Association  - 5 or 6 staff, small budget but became leading centre for theoretical research
p119
pressure from Ilford (who funded them essentially) = closure of BPRA, move of research scientists to Ilford in 1930

Ilford scientists concerned with production control and improved products
1925 established a lab to look at long term developments

1937 Ilford had 27 chemists/scientists but all working among 5 diff labs

p121
Frances Hamer joined ilford in 1924 to work on new sensitising dyes. From the 1930s Ilford had great rep for photo materials, based on their new dyes. However they lost Hamer in 1930 to Kodak, following a disagreement over the ventilation of her lab. 

p124
ICI dyestuffs division in Manchester exploited the Agfa patents for colour processes.
Ilford launched colour film in 1948, improved version when Kodak patents expired 1962. 
ICI's colour print system obtained by Ilford following ICI's control of Ilford in 1959.

p125 ICI did not diversity into photography until after WW2, and Ilford also went into chems but did not get together until later when both their individual strategies had failed.


No mention of users, consumers, whether they exerted any kind of demand or influence on the companies. c