Innovation and Environmental Risk
ed. Lewis Roberts and Albert Weale
Behaven Press London/New York
1991
-------------------------------
Geoffrey Lean

The Role of the Media (23-30)
p23
most people at least initially get most of their information on innovation and risk form the media. 
media - 2 way channels - carry info that helps to shape public attitudes but convey those reactions back to decision makers.  (e.g number of press cuttings in MAFF folders)

important action to reduce unacceptable risk. Media coverage of hazards of lead in petri and reaction of the public to them played impt part in persuading govt re lowerin/removal of lead. 

On the other hand, media have helped to promote misconceptions. e.g. fear of public exposure to radiation. 
p24 few aware of natural sources, all focus is on man-made

media as a whole better trusted than official sources of info, even if that trust is not particularly high. 

environmental groups overwhelmingly communicate their views through newspaper reports and on TV. 

p25
news values
environment briefly fashionable 1972-74 then fell out of favour when wilder predicictions such as in the club of Rome's Limits to Growth were quickly discredited. 

env issues did not fall into the adversarial style of Britains public affairs. Not fought out in parliament between Labour and Tory. 
Most news values are largely formed in this adversarial context so if story didn't conform to this pattern it was not counted as newsworthy. Many papers only became interested in env after it became political dn therefore adversarial. 

good a reporting debate and division, poor when recording process of reaching consensus
good at reporting events, but bad at reporting processes. 
Exxon Valdez - big media event, but too little coverage of the greater amounts of oil discharged routinely each year into the oceans. 
news by definition has to be new and unusual. 

p26
much coverage of airline crash killing 80, but no reports of car crashes killing 80 x 1 person

public threshed of boredom is low, media's threshold is lower. 
media imitate each other - explain why one particular type of stye received intense media attention and then dies away

e.g. attacks by Rottweilers or other dogs prominently reported every day - a single particularly horrific or well publicised axe, or even more powerfully ,2 or 3 cases in quick succession fuels public interst and media concern to responsed to it. Public concern about air pollution dropped by half as the media turned attention elsewhere. (Parlour and Schatzow 78, Dworking and Pijawka 82)

p27
Immediacy - timing and who is affected is important

---------------
JC Felton
Acceptance of innovation: an industry view of environmental aspects
30-37

p35
Concept of product stewardship 
life cycle of product - implications for humans and environments
ideally product specification incorporates input from interested parties inc users, regulator, academia = representative societal view

labelling
however expertly acceptability has been built into a product, it may not be achieved in practice if the product is not used in the way it was intended. Process of education, powerful means of transferring the ned info to the customer. 
well studied by agrochem ind. 
Coordinated through GIFAP = attenion paid to pictograms of safe handling 1988
difficult, but standardised system has evolved 

labelling included within EC dangerous substances directive 
chief value of a label 'dangerous for the envr' to encourage appropriate behaviour by user to protect the env
assumes normal beaver of users is env acceptable and additional precautions should be necessary for only a few specially hazardous compounds
or - if any product not bearing the label will it automatically be handled without particular care. 

p36
however effectively industry fulfils its obligations, risk cannot be excluded altogether. While public can ask for increased reassurance there must be a recognition that this has a price. This could be that products that might other wise have sig advantages are excluded, eliminating any further advances. Need to make judgements, recognise that they involve balances of advantage rather than a perfect solution. 
Industry must ensure evaluation processes are adequate and sound. Must fairly represent the benefits and risks of products and processes. respect for the legitimate concerns of there parties. 

need training and familiarity in analysing the wide view so that conflicting interested involved can be placed in correct relationship. Responsibility of education. 

-----------------------------
John Sheail
Regualtion of Pesticide Use
historical perspective (38-46)

p39
it was the report of the official UK Committee on Health Welfare and Safety in Non Industrial Employment )Gower Committee) that first brought the potential side effects of the new pesticides to th public notice. It proposed that employers should provide protective clothing, whenever poisonous sprays were being used (sec of state 1949)

mid 1950, Min Ag were in no doubt that their Minister should be seen taking action to protect operatives. Confeence - farmers workers manufacturers and contractors. 
no evidence there was a need for pain measures. orderly examination of probe was in hand. 

Govt agreed and passed without opposition an Agriculture (poisonous Substances) Bill in 1953

p40
Zuckermans working party adamant controls should be imposed on mfcrs of chemicals. No new chems or formulae or existing products should be offer for sale until clearance given by Ag Depts, acting on advice o f advisory committee. Min Ag thought statuary controls unjustified and impracticable. Failed to find any instances of illness resulting from eating food sprayed with weedkillers or insecticides. Home grown [not sure if means uk, or smallholders] crops sprayed with organochlorin or organophosphorus compounds was small, no certain idea as to what chemicals if any had been applied to imported foodstuffs.  enforcement impossible due to rudimentary detection/analysis methods. 

Home Office had been able to rely on voluntary scheme of notification re poisons and Hort Branch of Min Ag stressed that mfcrs of crop protecting chemicals general had a proper sense of responsibility. Could be relied upon to take precautions for guidance against the improper or careless use of their products. 
Xuckerman unconvinced. 

