J Keir Howard
MB, ChB		He separates these with a comma, but both mean the same thing? Some units listed in () award MB ChB, Bachelor of Medicine (Birmingham, Bristol, Lancaster, Leeds, Leicester Liverpool,  Keele, Mcr, Sheffield and Warwick)
BD				Bachelor of Divinity
MFOM (Lond & I) Member, Faculty of Occupational Medine 
DIH					Diploma in Industrial Health / Designated Industrial Hygeinist
Medical Adviser to the Chemical Industries Association


Reviews an ASTMS [Association of Scientific, Technical and Managerial Staffs trade union 1969 - 1988, formed from merger of ASSET and AScW Association which brought lab and technical workers in universities, NHS, chemical and metal manufacturing, ASTMS later merged with TASS to form MSF Manufacturing Science and Finance, which in 2002 became Amicus which then became Unite - both AScW and ASTMS archives are held at Warwick University Modern  Records Centre] policy document, generally happy that its well researched but unhappy of the over emphasis to the point of distortion and the vilification of industry and govt, as does Epstein's book *The Politics of Cancer*

"such brazen use of health issues for political ends is to be deplored"

p2
very clear legal duties and obi cations laid on employer to ensure dissemination of info relating to  H&S - withholding info is an offence. interpretation of statistical data is markedly misleading, one sided and too simplistic
p4
John Higginson - drew attention to 'environment' but as a very wide category, specifically and importantly he did not use the term to be equivalent to chemicals as the environmentalist the ecology lobby and this document do. 
'Higginson: the over emphasis on chemical carcinogens has distorted an approach to the environmental theory for many years'. 
p5
no attention to etiological factors (diet, alcohol, smoking) only environmental. Not possible to explain exciting cancer patterns in terms of chemical pollution. 
gives Utah as example - Mormon cancer rates lower than non-Mormons to illustrate. 
p6
used risk factors taken from worker studies 30-60 yrs ago, no longer applicable
does not consider improvements in occupational hygiene practice and general working env over the past 30 yrs
not exposure levels - only variety of actual, potientl and inferred exposures.
ASTMS doc reckons on 44% of 4 million workers heavily exposed to asbestos since 1940 have died or will die from asbestos linked cancer. 10% of these workers will die from mesotheliom = 400 000 deaths - nonsense, mathematically incorrect, trying to pass off nonsense as scientific fact. 

p7 
good reason for believing that we have gone through our woest case conditions in industrialised urban centres: little evidence of sig effect.  Main findings have shown that higher cancer incidence in non industrialised cities than industrialised cities, nor any evidence of industry linked cancers in industrialised cities. 

p8 
re higher proportional mortality for breast cancer in secretaries cashiers school teacher and social workers. Is strains the limits of ingenuity to find a hidden chemical carcinogen lurking in the typewriter, blackboard or the school children. "To suggest as ASTMS does that on the basis of such poorly defined stat associations all cancer sufferers whose occupation carries an elevated risk of cancer should receive compensation is clearly irresponsible"

p10
'no threshold' no safe level of exposure concept appears repeatedly , relicts dependence on Epstein. 
p12
case studies in the control of cancer in the workplace: nothing new, nothing that is not already well known. Biased, ignoring UK experience. 

