James Sumner's book

'Chemical' beer was by implication drugged or doctored, undoubtedly fraudulent and prob poisonous. p107
p108 populäre awareness that beer was routinely adulterated

1720s - london porter method unknown to the public (had been pretty sure of the brewing of ale before then) p109
p109 securely respectable chemist could banish drug-shop connotations entirely, brewers quick to recruit consultant lecturers and analysts inc Humphrey Davy as expert witnesses in test cases concerning the legality of ingredients 

p110 Accum argued that his treatise didn't promote adulteration, but improved its detection and thus prevent it. 
p110 sixpenny pamphlet issued around 1790 in the name of Samuel Child, brewer - explained to householders how they could brew commercial drinks for themselves by imitating the 'deception' practiced in trade. 
cocculus indices - narcotic poison, imported from Asia
treacle as malt substitue
preps of burnt and boiled sugar for bitternesss and colour
flavourings including liquorice, cinnamon, capsicum, ginger, linseed
heading - for the froth, a mixture of alum and copperas (ferrous sulphate) 

this list became a standard resource for satirical attacks on brewers. 

[most of those things are flavourings, rather than household chemicals, more household ingredients] the cocculus simulated inebriation
p111 quassia - hop substitute (hops subject to extreme pricing, along w grain)

p114
brewers druggists - systematic, send travelling reps around brewers and publicans with lists of available ingredients
beer doctors - took sour beer, mixed it with ingredients, refermented it and sold it - were no subject to duty as they did not brew. Loophole eventually closed. 

Henry Hunt, ex brewer turned Radical Orator had proudly advertised beer free from any other ingredient waterer in 1807, only to be convicted of possessing adulterants the following yr.

p123
expert pronouncements on the state of beer didn't necessarily carry weight in public discourse. Many drinkers would have agreed with the ex-brewer wh in 1807 wrote of 'scienctic and chemical brewing' as a byword for toxic adulteration, lamenting the disappearance of a culture founded on plain rules. Was not the beer-drinking public who determined what was permitted. Regulation in practice was determined by a pattern of case law, which could be sternly directed by appeals to chemical authority. 

p124 
'I will not enter into a chemical discussion whether it will fine it or not.. it is enough for me to say the law upon the subject will not let you put stinking fish into your beer'
1802 (experimental isinglass from fish dissolved in stale beer - price-cutting)

p125
Murdock testified that it was exactly the same thing as isinglass - functionally and materially

Humphrey Davy as expert witness confined this, he had not made independent trials, not been briefed on brewhouse and unable to answer specifics, but his confidence made powerful impression. 
