Notes from Jellinek
The use of fragrance in consumer products

p19
not advisable to be single minded
multiple messages can be communicated:
e.g. a line of products generally recognised as having antiseptic properties is extended to include a baby lotion. May well choose colour and fragrance that communicate gentleness, lets the product be perceived as too harsh for babies. A new dishwashing detergent advertised as effectively cutting grease, the product door may be selected to communicate the balancing message "yet gentle on gads 

fragrance doe snot have to reinforce the central position, it can be used to communicate benefits that would not otherwise be readily apparent to the user: safety disinfecting power etc. 

advertising and label = stress novel differentiating features to induce trial. 
france and toehr product related features used to reassure the trier that the product is reliable in spite of its novelty 

p20
not everything can be communicated through fragrance: convenient vs inconvenient, or when the effectiveness is readily apparent, effective vs ineffective, fragrance is not a powerful communicator

p21
things that can be successfully communicated through fragrance:
luxury vs economy
masc vs fem
traditional vs innovative
safe vs not safe
natural vs synthetic
strong vs gentle
fleeting vs long lasting  action 

p45
Controlled vs natural exposures (consumer tests, design and interpretation)
random and accidental differences should be eliminated. With many consumer product tested under natural use conditions a major source of random differences is the way of using the product. e.g. the amount, the volume of water, the temp, some rinse in clean water, others don't. They differ in how they evaluate the product in general and its fragrance. Some sniff the bottle, other do not. Cooking odours interfere while in well ventilated kitchens the fragrance may be more noticeable. Some respondents use a hand lotion after dishwashing and never notice any residual odour left by the detergent. In large groups, this averages out. 

p48
usage condition tolerance:
two bath oils may be equally pleasing and effective, but one of them causes bathtub rings and makes skin feel grease at too high levels while th either does not. 

p190
fragrance and space
concentration gradient
enclosed spaces - stronger .This should be taken into account when setting fragrance levels for products such as oven cleaners, air fresheners for cars and skin tmt products applied before going to bed. 
products applied to warm suffices or in warm media release their fragrance faster, and make it travel father. 
the distance over which the fragrance of a product remains perceptible can be controlled by adjusting the fragrance concentration. 

p193 masking of human, env and product odour remains primary function of fragrance. 
p194
preferred way to deal with odours is to eliminate them at source. replace malodours substance w something less stinky. When elimnation is not practical, removal by chemical or physical means may offer a solution. 
aerosol room deodorant probably work chemically and physically - mist of fine droplets dissolves and precipitates the unwanted space odorants, and active ingredients fact with them to form non volatiles na non odourless reaction products. 

if removal is not possible, the smell can be maskd
olfactory neutralisation - find materials tat counteract the door of others. Tests by expel psychologist demonstrate that partial neutaliatiiion can occur but knowledge is too incomplete

p195
threshold raising - temporarily and partial y deaden the olfactory sense in a general way, raising the detection threshold for a broad range of odorants. Formaldehyde and acetaldehyde may work like this. Also menthol - associated with oral hygiene. Opposite of colour potentiators. 
range of application is limited by the fact that they are not neutral in their effect, the door of mento is obvious, formaldehyde and acetaldehyde elicit a stinging sensation at high concentration. 

Drowning out - hard to smell a rose in a smoke filled room. May drown out the door of smoke by introducing a rose scent provided its powerful enough. Brtue force has virtues of really working and being universal in applicability. To cover sting oorurs, must be strong, leading to total door intensity may make the cure worse than the complaint. 

true masking - not completely cover undesirable note, surround it with others notes in a way that it is no longer recognisable.

p196
Odor clash
application of scented products in quick succession. 
p197
harmonise - but this only works where user doesn't mix and match products of diff brands
give unscented or weak odours. 
give neutral doors 
make odours fleeting