Woodbrook, Quaker College, near Sellyoak - spent a year there, international diploma (served in shops, things like that - went back to college hadn't known what to do)
studied other countries

went to league of nations for school trip

Being a Quaker is an international field. Has not remained a Quaker, retired during the war, fraught -  fighting was wrong, cause was right. 

private, secretarial work after college. Lived at home. 

became member of labour party, age 20
what stimulated, not sure...
trying to relate to left book club - but that would have been after the war. Have to avoid such a war again - what changes do we need to prevent it? Labour govt came in on that sort of feeling.

Met husband through political interests. 

Worked when first married - odd things, like lecturing, part time things 
involved in thoguth about a better society, position of women, it was if  we were starting again, town planning and so on. 

huband worked with Co-op - paid employment

how did you become member of wood green council
always interested in politics, there were vacancies
what was experience when on council?
don't feel that it was a new experience, I just got on with it. Always interested in the kinds of thigns that the council had committees on. 

with children its good to get into something different in the evenings. 

hated high rise buildings, flatly refused. Was outvoted, we have got two towerblocks. I suffer from claustrophobia, don't like being in lifts. 

NHS, welfare, social security, everything was happening. 

not directly involved in health

leader of the council 1954 - 
Plenty of ideas, knw what I wanted to do, that's quite useful. 

deputy mayor, wanted me to be mayor, must draw a line somewhere, I've got 2 small children and a home. 
wood green, tottenham and hornsey = harringey. 

chairman of harringey in 1965 - not a great deal to do there, didn't settle down until the next year, with all the new burroughs. 

1955 - 1975 Parliament must have taken up a lot of time
how did you go about getting into parliament? do you have to do a lot of campaigning?
Go to meetings, go to certain buildings, sort of carrries you along. Went out wit aloud speaker. 
Husband was doing something else, he was up in Rutland. He didn't get int o Parliament - not a safe seat.

Side two
described self as housewife when you got into parliament, article did mention that you'd done a great deal of other work, lectured in america on foreign policy
	Oh I didn't lecture, I may have spoken because people can get up and speak at society of friends...

magazine was women and home

education - no
mainly it was housing. Alwasy felt aggreived about how things were done in regard to women. Race relations bill, 
thought well, what about women. Readapted it to women. Introduced it, never got plac eon ballot. Why not have my bill? - someone else got it. 


quite a lot fo env things - for a long time, questions certain days, certain ministers. Agriculture one day, usually the only woman in the house at the time, asking questions, asking questions about the countryside and so on. All the farmers were there. Force feeding and that sort of thing, the type of agriculture [intensive farming] battery hens and that sort of thing. Quite active in the agriculture field because of that. Little voice piping up about other things and all this growling. 

always been interested in health - the cancer control campaign
consumer campaign, consumerism booming and all sorts of horrors. 
Co-operative MP- co op in trade. 

Did the Coop put any requests or pressure on you do do certain things? Not directly no. There was a group, we met once a month or so, so we kept in touch. If someone was being left out, we were asked questions. Very little pressure. 

was Fred Willey's parliamentary secretary, some of the things I was interested in I couldnt' do anything about because I was his pps. 

decontrol - rent act?
looking at it the other day, think I was on the ctte - may have been that one. 

ctte chairman you can't speak - I was chairman for quite a lot of cttes, surprised to find I was making speeches, which was very unusual.

64-79 chairman's panel - one of the 20 or so people, so when a bill goes to ctte you can be a chairman. 

lots more exciting in local govt, eveyone's v well behaved in parliament don't have to do very much its fiarly dull.

joint chair parliamentary committee on pollution think I helped to set it up - if a group of members feels somethign is being neglected they can form a ctte, have meetings, influence events. 
was it a sucess? 
yes, when I mentioened the env that was what I was talking about.
can't relaly fail when there's an issue of that kind because its so obvious to everyone. It was early days then, people didn't really know.

environment issue swallowed up land and national resources, a bit hazy about that. don't always know what's happening behind the scenes. Set up a ministry to have a particular minister, then they drop it. 
be there, do odd jobs, one minister will prob overload a pps and the other will not use them enough. FT Willey was very nice. 

vice chair of parliamentary labour party - reg weekly meeting, sit up on the platform, so if the chair can't be there, you take over. 

annual meetings  - annual conference 
able to go as parliamentary section, get in without being a delegate, not very much from what comes over on the Television. 



book
Vallance, Elizabeth
Women in the house

p62 Butler's parents wer emembers of he Society of Friends, adn, althouhg officially uninvolved in politics they had a deep interest in community and social work.  (this is in the context of looking for how women get into politics - that there is often some kind of family influence)
p63 this gives sense of politics being important, significant and accpatble.
development of sense of personal efficacy - individual can personall affec the course of social development and the way that society operates, ant that individual problems and in justic should be acknowledged and can be resolved.  Problems can be resolved by people themseve. Many women do not believe in their own comptetance. All the  women I intervied ahd a very strong sense of their effectiveness as witnessed by their belief in ability to do things and change things. 





