Soap and Water
Cleanliness Dirt and the Working Classes in Victorian and Edwardian Britain
Victoria Kelley

Taurus London\
2010

p8
mentions Adrian Forty, Objects of Desire - design history, alarm about dirt increasing directed against working classes, domestic hygiene classes to address this. 

p9
identifies anxiety in writing of Anne McClintock and A. Forty, where grime is a symbol of potential disorder in social and politics systems based on equality. quest for cleanliness seen as a way society attempted to displace deep seated anxieties. Lack of grime = lack of anxiety.
Impsed through legislation or propaganda, on lower class by higher classes. 

p20
dirty cities
industrialisation
poor housing, lack of clean air, water, drainage, sewage, waste disposal

p22
Germ theory spread beyond sic and med circles to magazines, advice books and advertising. popularised explanations of the role of bacteria in the spread of disease appearing form the 1880s onwards. 
ME Loane district nurse - botanical metaphor

Typhoid, measles, etc arise form the seeds of these disease and from oohing else. A person who has contracted one of them infects the air all round him just as dandelions or groundsel shed their seeds all around the neighbourhood. 

p23
germ theory turned the battle against dire and disease to the domestic sphere - sanitary reform of sewage and drainage, abolition of public nuisances was not enough. Germs could be found everywhere, then private practices of hygiene and cleanliness came to be as important as public measures. 

p147 representations of germs  - make the invisible visible with emotive notions of disgust and revulsion - as indistinct skeletal, bat like creatures, sinster lizards centipedes and flies (Santitas disinfecting fluid)

dirt threat within home. 

p56
regularity and order
(or lack of it) - irregular hours, unpredictable earnings of casual labourers was a great evil. Permant workers = respectable, sober, clean. Casuals low looking, bestial. 
Regular used v frequently as direct synonym of respectable, a menaingt it still carries. 
Idea of regularity strong in the domestic sphere - repetitive tasks of everyday life. 
Chase - tent collector under Octavia Hill's system of housing reform. Mid class women managed rented property in attempt to exert beneficial influence on working class tenants. Deptford. 
p57
'Mrs' Wallace-Draper described by Chase as feckless - judgement supported by irregular relationship, and irregularity of her housewifery
Mrs Singleton - her home like her life is clean tidy and ordered. 
if works of social investigation were coloured by stress on regularity and order, even more the case with works of prescription, the advice columns and books. Frequencies were stressed again and again, correct intervals. Competing voices, and messages. 

p59
the price of cleanliness like the price of peace is eternal vigilance sand according to Browne ' women - mistresses of households, domestic servants - are the soldiers who are deputed by society to engage in this war against dirt'
"water closets need constant attention... the condition of the water closet is a more certain sign of the character of a housekeeper than is any other part of the house, the back kitchen and larder alone excepted." 1882 Phillis Browne 'Our homes and how to make them healthy'

p75
anatomy of grime
some sources are constant - house dust that is skin particles, imprecise eating habits of children. 
some sources have changed - motorised traffic fumes, burning of coal both industrially and domestically, gas lighting
p77 - dust and fluff brought home by textile workers, coal dust by miners

p78
MJ Daunton - hierarchy of conveniences - with water closets at the top, through which diff local authorities progressed at uneven rates. 
By the start of the first world war water closets were becoming predominant in most urban areas, but nevertheless throughout much of the period of this study there were certain areas and types of housing where large middens, smaller ash pits or smaller pail closets were still common, as were shared facilities. All systems meant that people and homes would be in regular close contact with large quantities of foul waste matter. Water closets were preferable if a proper system of sewers was in place, but even these were far from hygienic. 
Not efficient at removing waste, set water trap to prevent gas from sewer or ease of cleaning (ref 48)
silence on human dirt does not mean that people were not concerned with middens the state of was or the cleaning ov chamber pots. Childcare articles rarely mention dirty nappies or potty training, though go into every other detail. 

stain removal not mentioned as part of the laundry process

p116
Ross - Love and Toil
mass marketed nationa/international brands only patent medicines, condensed milk and some soaps and cleansers - Monkey Brand, Brasso and Bluebell Metal Polish, Bebra grate polish, Sunlight soap, REckitts starch - were bought with any regularity by working class housewives.  

o119
burke sent off for free samples advertised in magazines. memory game down Eltham high street - naming the advertisements encountered - four soap or cleaning products in the list. 

p112 class barriers have fallen before the all conquering advertiser. Favoured with tens same solicitous regard and flattering assurance as to the value of our custom i nthe economic world. 

p113 Thomas Richards - Commodity Cultre of Victorian England
analysis of commercial imagery important in set the strength of consumer culture in late vict. bulk of attention on middle classes. 

p135
several sources claimed that weomn respond more to illustration sn narrative, men to text ad fact based advertisement. _64_Moran business of Advertising and Spiers, the art of publicity

cleaning too much -
 refers to Nigel Slater (p15),
'drop a sweet wrapper in the waste paper basket and it was emptied before you could say humbug. Make a skid mark on the lavatory pan and it was brushed and flushed quicker than you could say shit'
 also ME Loane - 
'one learns to understand.. how it is that the dirty, untidy, young wife, who , when her husband return hungry and tired form work holds up a smilingly assured face to be kissed, exclaiming 'Graios if I hadn't forgotten all about your tea!' and clatters together an extravagant and ill chosen meal while she puts out a stream of cheerful and inconsequent chatter is more loved and dealt with more patiently tenderly and faithfully than her clean and frugal neigour who has prepared a meal that ought to turn the author of Twenty satisfying suppers for sixpence green with envy but who expects her husband to be eternally grateful because 'he could eat his dinner off the boards', when all that the poor man asks is to be allowed to walk over the unreproached.' (p66)

p160
notion of thrift - complex strategies to compare prices, weigh considerations of cost and qualities. Miller was 1990s but a hundred years earlier thrift was also stressed. making ends meet on limited budged. Self help and mutual improvement embodied in friendly societies and co0op store. 
soap wrapper prize schemes were viewed as strategy of thrift, as well as pleasure. 

p50 Mrs AB budget -modest income  husband earns between 18s 6d and 23s 9d per week, one child at home.  8products inc 4 branded
Soap - unbranded hard sop, for washing ,washing up scrubbing floors. 
startch
blue 
bath brick
Carbosil washing soda
Globe polish
zEbra polish 
gold Dust soap powder - beautiful for washing. 

p185
Maud Pember Reeves remembers a respondent - one piece of soap to scrub floor, next brought into play when bathed the baby, long scratch on the baby from a cinder in he soap. cutting the soap in 2 'wouldn't last not 'art as long'. 






