Pesticides and Aquatic Ecosystems
25 February 1964

various organisations working on the effects of pesticides and aquatic ecosystems

accumulation of toxic chemicals in fish of particular interest

Report of the Frazer Comittee - Nature Conservancy need to collaborate studying accumulation in animals and floral and faunal changes in inland waters. 

MAFF - approached 5 years ago by the Association of British Manufacturers of Agricultural Chemicals about their concern. Toxicity to fish now forms a central part of the Approval Scheme

Experiments on aquatic weeds treated with herbicide showed no effect on fish. 

Dept of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland. 
Salmon fishing = sporting and commercial interests
Department started with looking at cyanide in fish, developed into looking at pesticides, chiefly DDT and derivatives. 
Gas chromatography now allows the scope to expand. 
lab tests and field studies of DDT - accumulation
dieldrin - food chain, use as dip and 
continually at work iwth fish sent for analysis - pollution and weedkiller mortalities. 

Water pollution research lab - 
from work on midge control through insecticide - only study effects on aquatic insects

Nature Conservancy
persistent chemicals of particular interest. 
survey to find which organisms contain residue, which carry the greatest burdens. Work out suitable indicator species for moitoring - great crested grebes adn herons.
NC working iwth the Plant Pathology lab - paraquat and diquat, effects on invertibrates and fresh water plants. 

Water Research Association 
drinking water supply was their main concern - what were the toxic or taste problems for humans. Interested in new methods. 

Freshwater Biolgoical Association
not doing any direct work

Zoology Dept - Liverpool - why this university?
Mr Hynes - single doses of DDT and effects more generally of DDT. 
sheep dip study in Isle of Man - catastropic effects. 
shows how dependent a research strand is on an individual - unlikely to continue pesticide research when he moved to Canada (unless he's making himself soudn more important than he perhaps was)

Potential others who are maybe doing work, or would be interetsted 
Shell Company - work on molluscides (assume this is on rigs and drilling) 
rep from mfcrs of ag chemicals - through ABMAC, surprised by absence myself
Oxford Weed Control Unit (ARC) 
Representative from marine fish - when was CEFAS set up? 

effects of copper sulphate and chlorine on aquatic ecosystems not well studied - no products are mentioned here ,which would make it more interesting and valuable to me. 
declared not relevant to this group - therefore, I suppose that the pesticides group do not count these chemical compounds as the kind of synthetic products that they're interested in? 

River boards could make greater contributions
research into ariel spraying

domestic use of chemicals not brought up, all the focus is on large scale users, . Although the water pollution chap was concerned about the effects of drinking or useing water that was contaminated with pesticides. 
















