HO 305/32
poisons paraquat
control of paraquat

Scottish Home and Health Dept. 
25 Feb 1972
Miss M E DeLorey writing to Mr Stewart Home Office

asked by MAFF to considere whether further publicity can be given in Scotland to the dangers of swallowing parquat. However, as the cases we had recently have not been "accidental" we really do not think that further publicity is desirable and I am wondering whether it is possible to apporach retailers to bring to their attention the dangers involved and to impress upon them their responsibility in ensuring that paraquat is not sold to the wrong people

recently a news reporter in Glasgow successfully carried out an experiment in puchasing paraquat by simply going into a shop and asking for it. The most recent case of poisoning in Scotland concerned a young man with a mental hisotry who also had no prolbem purchasing it from a shop. 

I wd by grateful if you cd let me know what the conditions are in terms of the Poisons Act and Rules with regard to the retail sale of paraquat and if you think there would be any point in pursuing this line of thought. If you agre that this is worth a try can you let me have a list of retailers licenced to sell poisons in Scotland or failing that let me know where such a list could be obtained. 


Reply from DA Wrigley on behalf of Stewart

Paraquat is in Part II of the |Poisons List. apart from 5% pellet preparations whcih are completely exempt from control by an entry in the Group II of Schedule 3 to the poisons rules it can only be sold by 
1)an authorised seller of poisons, from rpremises registered with the Pham Soc
OR
a listed seller of Part II poisons from premises specified in the local authority's list. 
It must also be labelled with the name of the poison, proportion of poisons to toatl ingredients, the word poison and the name adn address of the seller. 
a listed seller can only sell Praquat in a closed container as closed by the manufactuereer or other person from whocm the poison was obtained. 

... Pharmaceutical Society publish a list annually of the list of registered premises of authorised sellers (12 000 in GB). ...
No particular provision in the poisons law relating to the present control of paraqyuat relevant to your line of thought to which poison sellers could be drawn and in view of that you many feel that there is insufficient basis for writing to them. 