Lees-Maffei
Design at Home

p2
"advice literature needs careful handling. It cannot be taken as direct evidence of past experience, it is not a record of what people actually did in their homes or of how they decorated or used their domestic interiors. But to disregard ad lit as unreliable, and to prefer primary unpublished sources such as diaries and letters as having a closer relation to actually historical practice, is to miss out on it's value. Sociologist Cas Wouters (1995:109) has pointed out that etiquette books circulate what I term 'real ideals'. The normative ideals shared by members of a society to prescribe desirable behaviours and consumption practise. Dom ad lit is therefore a richly useful genre of constructed ideals offering insights into the social and material histories of the home (Lees-Maffei, 2003).

p3
given as gifts (see inscriptions inside many), anticipation, primed, whether or not the advice given is applied. Consumers of [home decorating] books may be dreamers as well as doers as they consume real ideals.

p33
serial forms such as magazines, ad campaigns and television series need to keep their audience coming back for more, domestic advice books by contrast attempt to be definitive and appear to aspire to an objective authority impassible with commercial endorsement and direct advertising, but indirect advertising is common across the genre.
[interesting, will she explain this any further?]

p34
magazines able to respond quickly to situations and changes, while domestic advice books (more time consuming and expensive to produce) aim to be defined and promote the values of continuity and tradition

magazines the product of reader and writer in a relationship, through letters pages. Most advice books don't interact with their readers in this way
[perhaps apart from where most popular features/ contributions from readers are sought, esp with ref to home cooking and housewifery, probably more so than the fashion and interior decorating that Lees-Maffei is concentrating on)

magazines shaped by depend eon advertising - advice books without advertising to appear objective and authoritative.

p37 
relates advising and advertising - both educative, though one has more commercial function. Christine Frederick "succumb[ed] to the lucrative lure of product endorsement".  .. tension between authoritative guidance (should be neutral and objective) and commercial persuasion (in which a vested interest is the raison d'être)  is common across the advice genre (Cook, 1994: 1-31)

p39
indirect advertising abounds in dom ad lit through the use of macros and retailers publicity images. Gives example of Woman's own Book of Modern Homemaking 1967 where Marley floor vinyls are singled out for praise and photographic example, no other makes receive this attention. The use of marketing materials was cheaper and easier than photographing especially staged rooms. 

p45
close reading reveals techniques: narrative patterns of before and after stories, recurrent themes and motifs, stock characters, gaps, subtexts and images. 
p46
advice literature does not agitate for change. Rather it responds to and mediates change while its dominant tope is past precedent: the tried and tested. 

p49
Strasser [1982] 2000:x
approach ad lit in conjunction with info about technical change and economic development ... Women do not necessarily believe everything they read, and the advice, a kind of reform iterature often contradicted their own experience, presented inconsisten ideas or offered doctrines that were at variance with they cultural backgrounds. Fortunately the lit is shaped by these resalisties as much as it shapes them, and considerable information can be read between the lines. 

Lees-Maffei disagrees that ad lit should always need validation through recourse to the principally masculine discourses of tech and economics. 

p50 historians have used published advice to overcome the lack of direct testimony about [private and embarrassing - in relation to sex] subjects. 

p51
like all didactic discourse dom ad lit cannot simply be used as direct evidence of historical practice due to the impossibility of ever tracing the extent to which published advice was followed, using either the subjective accounts of letters, diaries and oral history, the wider data offered by the book trade or the meta discourse of critical reception. Neither should ad lit be ignored, because it is written and published with a view to mass appeal and communicates ideals which are real, that is not constructed by soil scientists. 

p52
plagiarism - in ref to recipe books, 
[however, the content is often very very similar in books about housewifery.]
p53
describes 1913 book "First Attempts" The :little Housekeeper Florence Tapsell
everything going wrong - readers develop domestic competence as they read the story, though undermined by the framing statements from Mrs Peters which emphasise learning through doing [rather than reading]

Richardsana dn Callahan 1962 - 'Current practice is to put home economics facts and procedures into simple home language instead of the stilted impersonal scientese so long considered the correct way to write a textbook' [1962] 1970:136

p57 1952 Margaret Nicol's Homecraft and Homemakeing also features inept protagonist - converstation between more competent and inept characters, followed by a list of pointers

p61 gives example of permanganate of potash used as an inexpensive and convenient stain, does not possess lasting qualities, partially on wood which is subjected to strong sunlight ... it destroys brushes and stains anything with which it comes into contact. The crystals should be dissolved in some earthen ware receptacle such as an old ham jar or basin (GHI [1944] 1946:49]

Lees-Maffei finds narrative even in the contents lists - organising them into scene setting, antagonists which disrupt ideal homes, maintenance textiles/food, external factors
in another example she does this with life cycle, and how it relates to the stages listed in the contents
(birth, life, death; widening horizons - familiar to unfamiliar; life cycle - adolescence, courtship, employment; widening horizons: from you to them)

on experts - 
p61 recommendations not given by named author [in case of GHI book] - representing the voice and authority of the Institute. Can find narrative here too - protagonist is the Institute, antagonist is the permanganate, witness is the reader - scene implied is the Institute test centre. 

patterns - house to home - achieved only through efforts described in the advice manual

p67
testimonial from user/reader Beth O. Caldwell, Guide to Easier Living
"I bought this book when it had just come out and I was newly married. I've used it so much that tit is in tatters, but I still treasure it. The information and illustrations of storage closets, kitchens, general home layouts, etc are still as useful and inspiring today as they were back in the 1950s. ... This book is like a dear friend and has influenced my life for 50 some odd years. It is one of the 9 or 10 most influential and treasured books that I own."

moving away from outmoded traditional way of keeping house which is impossibly meticulous and far too laborious for our times. (Mary and Russel Wright's Guide to Easier living 1950 1954

case study on Betty Crocker - p67-70
fictional expert, counted as the most famous woman after Eleanor Roosevelt in 1945, cook books, not all using General Mills convenience product, typeface and irregular spacing to type letter

p70
Offer imagined and improved future as a model to emulate and realise. Pleasure and purpose does not reside solely in its practical application, because advice am or may not be followed. 
p71
illuminates some ideals, can help historians understand what people may have thought, but cannot tell us what they did. Exists between prescription and practice. 
 
