Littlewoods catalogue

christmas club  1933
children's toys
p16
Chemistry set
AG46   3/6
All the fun of the laboratory with none of the risks
Chemistry sets have won the heart of the modern boy. They teach as they amuse. Watch his face glow with pleasure as he mystifies wyou with invisible inks, water that turns colour touch paper and so on. All the chemicals for doing several splendid experiments are here together with exact and easy instruction how to go about it. You''l be a popular parent if you give him one of these. 

Is a Modern Science box - showing open, can't read what's in it though. 
on same page as 
kliptiko construction set and magic lantern


Christmas club 1934
p22

98 Chemistry experiments with this outfit
T157
3/6 the set
You will have hors of fun with this outfit which includes twelve test tubes containing different chemicals a bunsen burner, litmus papers metal dishes, scoop, filter paper and other interesting apparatus also a handbook giving instruction for all kinds of fascinating and harmless experiments. 
on same page as an electrical set for the practical boy and a conjurer box of tricks, actor's make up and detectives disguise cabinet. 


cameras transition from fancy goods to sports goods and outdoor requisites, but do not seem to be accompanied by dark room equipment
chemistry sets seem to be only for christmas, they are big buys, not something that can be bought with pocket money perhaps, although replacement chems prob are. 
	the 1933 advert addressed parents, with the top line being about risk, the 1934 advert addressed the child user - showing a change in how the catalogues were thought to be used by the shoppers. The risk statement also moved to the end - harmless experiments. 
	
	
	1938
	
	sprayers and syringes, 
	
	but still  can't find camera or chemistry set - despite the construction sets being sold outside of christmas, I can't find these other items. 
	
	The inclusion of cameras, garden equipment including mowers and sprayers, and hobbies chemistry sets in the Littlewoods catalogue, show that these items were available to working class and middle class families who found that this was a convenient way to pay for goods that they might not otherwise be able to access. The chemistry set was very much gendered, both in language and in the context of the other items that were advertised alongside it, though the camera was not featured with people it tended to be shown sitting on a surface rather in the hands of a user. The garden   
