Access provided by University of Chester [Change] Project MUSE
About Contact Help Tools Order Saved Citations (0)
for Librarians for Publishers Advanced Search
 Browse Book and Journal Content on Project MUSE OR       Go
Browse > Social Sciences > Business and Society > Advertising & Society Review > Volume 15, Issue 2, 2014
The Id Goes Shopping in Its Maidenform Bra:
Navigating Gender Spheres in the Postwar “Dreams” Campaign
Astrid Van den Bossche (bio)

http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/v015/15.2.van-den-bossche01.html

I’m the chief
and the siren too–
the most incendiary figure in this five-alarm dream!
Dangerous, yes…
but beautifully under control,
I’m lifted to new heights
of excitement by
my dream of a Maidenform.
– “I dreamed I was a fireman in my Maidenform bra”, 1953

From 1949 until 1969, Maidenform—by then already one of the leading bra companies in the U.S.—ran an advertising campaign that was not only notable for its longevity, but also for the ripples it sent through the fabric of cultured society. Whether it was its candid use of semi-nudity, the copy’s Freudian wish-fulfillment implications, the hint of female emancipation, or the compounding effect of all of the above, Maidenform caused a stir that propelled the brand into the cultural consciousness of post-WWII generations. The timing of the campaign is key to understanding its impact: striking at the heart of postwar culture, it coincided not only with a return to restrictive gender norms, echoed in fashion via the popularity of Dior’s New Look, but also with the popular perception of the consumer goods boom as unprecedented and unnatural, which concurred with an all time high suspicion of advertising as mind control.
“I dreamed I […] in my Maidenform bra,” read the campaign’s tagline, captioning a young woman engaging in said activity whilst proudly displaying her bra. With more than 100 variations appearing in more than 15 national publications, the ads gave the Maidenform woman a varied and sometimes fantastical life: She took strolls in Manito Park, worked as a lady editor, escaped on trips to Venice and Paris, saw herself cut in half, fancied herself a work of art (sometimes a Medieval Maiden, sometimes Venus de Milo), and experienced the exhilaration of winning political elections (Figure 1). Nothing seemed impossible for the Maidenform woman, who engaged in activities deemed appropriately feminine (e.g., sitting on sidewalk cafés and shopping), as well as venturing into a traditionally masculine domain (e.g., extinguishing fires and acting as ambassadors). Nothing was impossible, because, after all, it was just a dream.
Figure 1. 
“I dreamed I won the election in my Maidenform bra,” 1952.
View full resolution
In one of the very few articles that discuss the campaign at length, Barbara J. Coleman asserts the ads “disregarded or parodied women’s unrealistic occupational aspirations,”i suggesting the depicted aspirations were, to their audience, not only unattainable, but also dismissible as passing fancies. She continues: “At first glance, Maidenform’s ad suggested liberation from the confines of the house, but its condescending portrayal of a woman in a grocery store wearing only her brassiere implied the opposite.”ii Partial female nudity, then, was enough to establish a derisory attitude towards women and the value of their occupations. Written in 1995, this damning account of the campaign is still one of the few descriptions longer than a mention-in-passing. It implies that Maidenform’s only noteworthy footprint was its ridicule of women, its success indicative of nothing more than the consumers’ happy participation in their subjugation.
Considering the campaign’s longevity and cultural embedment, such readings should raise red flags of oversimplification. They fail to engage with the myriad of contradicting, challenging, and controvertible texts that may shed a more nuanced light on the campaign’s workings. While it is sometimes difficult to expose structural oppression, it is equally important to recognize subversive thoughts within their context. Where Coleman believes “both male and female viewers find themselves complicit with Maidenform and laughing at a woman wearing only her underwear at the grocery store,” and a little further rhetorically questions, “whose sexual fantasy is represented,”iii the campaign’s rippling effects suggest a more complex picture than the universalized male gaze criticism first proposed by Laura Mulvey and ubiquitous in the criticism of lingerie advertising.
Pornography is equally never far from the conversation. Paul Rutherford writes: “Much later the campaign was remembered as the vehicle of a kind of proto-feminist message, even though such a view masked the erotic character of so much of the advertising.”iv Positing the erotic as antithetical to feminist endeavor, nudity in advertising tends to be treated in the literature as an exploitation of the female body that leaves no room for empowerment. Similarly, 20 years after its end, Dreams was the butt of a scathing satire published in Heresies, a feminist arts & politics magazine (Figure 2). Standing in for all lingerie advertisements, the author lampoons Maidenform as complicit in the objectification of women and the distasteful gratification of men’s sexual impulses.
Figure 2. 
“Men used to masturbate to our ads,” says this spoof on the Dreams Campaign.
Source: Heresies 16 (1983)
View full resolution
What may just have been a debate on the appropriateness of certain advertising tactics evolved into a sex war—in which the “[…] manifestation of the competing uses, contested ownership, and conflicting sense of entitlement inspired by women’s undergarments and their meanings”v take on moral judgments about consumption and cultural meaning. The present review of Maidenform’s 1950s-1960s advertising efforts suggests that the Dreams campaign did more than shock the public with its audacity and compel women to regard their bodies as vessels of eroticism. The highlighting of female difference, so entrenched in the time’s rhetoric, may have been a vehicle to challenge the very restrictions they imposed.
First delving into the specifics and the context of the campaign, popular fashions will be considered in terms of their embedment in postwar gender anxieties. As the 1950s was not only marked by the Cold War, but also the onset of a consumer goods boom, a review of the advertising schools in vogue will shed some light on why the campaign was received as it was—a paragon of Freudian manipulation. It will also reveal that at some time in this history, consumption, femininity, and psychoanalysis had irreparably intertwined into specific attitudes towards female identity, which now have seeped into our discourse on female agency. By reaching into the archives, we will look at Maidenform in ways that will challenge the readings presented above. Maidenform’s Dreams campaign, selling what is at once the most everyday and the most erotic of garments, turns out to be a rich lens to examine simmering tensions within the postwar gender society.
New (Out)Looks for the Postwar Woman: The Dreams Campaign Situated
Although, historically speaking, the commonness of the bra is far from self-evident, selling them was no longer a challenge by the 1940s. Concurring with a cultural fixation on the breasts, evident from wartime pin-ups (e.g., the Vargas girls), the worship of well-endowed cinema stars (e.g., Lana Turner as ‘the Sweater Girl’), and fashions such as Dior’s bosomed New Look,vi this undergarment had been accepted as a foundation of the feminine wardrobe. The corset was on its way out, steadily replaced by a girdle-and-brassiere “combo” that nonetheless promised “figure control to go with every aspect of [women’s] wardrobes from ball gowns to bathing suits.”vii Consequently, when Maidenform launched the first of its Dreams ads in 1949, its efforts were more geared towards creating a brand image that promoted its extensive product offers—from all-round ‘day’ bras to strapless—than justifying their necessity.
Allegedly the brainchild of Weintraub copywriter Mary Filius,viii the first advertisement, “I dreamed I went shopping in my Maidenform bra” (Figure 3), depicts a young woman engaging in said activity, which is evoked by a series of slightly surrealist line drawings of grocery goods. She holds a shopping bag in one hand while she twirls a link of sausages in the other, a sketched-on purse dangling from her elbow. It is an optimistic scene of everyday enjoyment, unremarkable except for her uncovered torso. As if oblivious to the fact that she had forgotten to put on a blouse (or shoes), the Maidenform woman goes about her everyday business with a spring in her step. The copy, however, suggests she was all too aware that “all eyes gave [her] figure a big ‘aye’” and invites identification by wondering whether “you’ve dreamed of a bra like this.” The dream appealed, and over the course of the next 20 years, the theme was picked up in a variety of occupations that ranged from the mundane (e.g., “I went strolling” (1949), “I went to the theatre” (1950)), to the aspirational (e.g., “I was a designing woman” (1955), “I won the Academy Award” (1953)), to a selection of absurd, playful, or whimsical states (e.g., “I was a jack-in-the-box” (1954), “I was bookends” (1959)).
Figure 3. 
The first of the Dreams ads: “I dreamed I went shopping in my Maidenform bra,” 1949.
View full resolution
Uncovering the bra for the entire world to see created a sensation. While it was far from the first time semi-nudity was used in advertising,ix it was unusual for it to enjoy such widespread and mainstream circulation. The campaign ran from 1949 to 1969 in the top national magazines of the times, including Harper’s Bazaar, Seventeen, Glamour, Ladies’ Home Journal, Cosmopolitan, True Confessions, Modern Screen, Woman’s Home Companion, Good Housekeeping, True Romance, Parents, Life, and McCall’s.x As if this wasn’t coverage enough, they also appeared in local newspapers across the U.S. (e.g., Spokane Daily Chronicle, Spokesman Review, Ottawa Citizen, Milwaukee Journal), and in publications abroad (e.g., The Rome News Tribune). According to Time, the ads appeared in more than 70 countries).xi The dream theme was further picked up in joint advertisements by department stores, such as Macy’s and Bloomingdale’s, which aimed to assure they not only stocked the brand, but equally dealt in expertise (Figure 4). The very fact that these mastodons of retail did not shy away from the racy campaign marks the cachet it bore despite its controversial nature. In the end, at least two of the names associated with the Dreams campaign turned out to be no less than stellar: copywriter Kitty D’Alessio later became president of Chanel,xii and photographer Richard Avedon was celebrated for both his artistic and commercial work.
When rival agency Leo Burnett conducted research in 1956 to determine which ads appealed to housewives, Maidenform’s brassièred dreams turned out to be a source of consternation among the respondents: “‘It goes too far,’ the ladies kept saying.”xiii This wasn’t really an issue, contests Kay Daly of NC&K: “Housewives […] should think those ads are shocking. That’s the point.”xiv Cutting through the increasing noise of commodity boom advertising, the how-to’s of marketing to women had become a very hot topic. Maidenform had apparently hit gold, as another poll in 1961 revealed that the Dreams ads beat the campaigns of any other competitor in terms of recall.xv Whether it was as successful in terms of sales is difficult to gauge,xvi but the extent of its reach into the recesses of cultural consciousness is not.
Figure 4. 
“It’s no dream that you’re lovelier in your Maidenform bras!” assures an advertisement for Wanamaker’s, New York Times, 1961. The copy elaborately describes a few of the Maidenform offers, along with illustration and price.
View full resolution
There are several reasons for the campaign’s popularity, but one major contextual factor cannot be stressed enough. Maidenform had latched onto a particular postwar anxiety: the reestablishment of eroded pre-war gender roles, which entailed a comeback for ultra-femininity. As women engaged in war efforts and been lauded for their patriotic endeavors, they had broken down a slew of barriers that had previously guarded the realms of proper feminine occupation. Wages had been paid out, clothes had become less constrictive, and the domain of labor activity previously thought only of masculine purview had been challenged. Yet after the war, critics began to blame society’s ills on women’s departure from the home and the ensuing demise of the family. The loss of femininity, they argued, drove the emasculation of men and neuroticism of children. So, a return to traditionalism where values of motherhood, familial wholesomeness, and homemaking proclivity prevailed.xvii
Simultaneously, because Maidenform’s models were clad in the fashion and the brand was well known for its conical bra, the campaign has been embedded in the history of Christian Dior’s striking New Look (Figure 5), introduced only two years previously in 1947. As Jill Fields’ review of the undergarment bears out, the New Look’s reception provides a rich lens to scrutinize the “midcentury dynamics of gendered fashion, power, and sexuality,”xviii which seemed to be governed by a domestic conservatism.xix “Figure control” was fundamental in shaping the postwar woman, both physically and mentally preparing her for a newly restrictive role: “Complying with conventions of femininity in dress and manner was a long-standing means of attracting a husband and obtaining the economic benefits of marriage—challenges that were especially important for women living in an era in which they could not easily support themselves.”xx The new ultra-feminine-but-chaste fashion, with its rounded shoulders, reduced waist, emphasized hips, and notably longer hemlines, was welcomed as a marker of peacetime femininity. Bras played as much a role in this as the constrictive corset because the breast uplift popularized during the Depressionxxi had made the bosom a prominent gender-affirming aspect of the female figure. Fashion, beauty, and semblance were regarded as the ultimate feminine tools to succeed in life—wielding them correctly would eventually culminate in marriage, the endgame of feminine ambition.
Figure 5. 
Christian Dior’s New Look, introduced in February 1947. Courtesy of The House of Dior.xxii
View full resolution
Figure 6. 
Maidenform is a “source of sorcery” in this ad, making her figure “bewitching” (1958). The suggestion that women used trickery and magic to “ensnare” unsuspecting men into marriage was not uncommon.
View full resolution
Yet this account, although not inaccurate, is reductive; it is a narrative that brushes over the actual experiences of postwar women who needed to navigate these social realities and who lived in a complex world of competing images and aspirations.xxiii These included the memory of wartime emancipation, the professional realm of the working girls who were foraying into higher positions at their firms, and alternate fashions that emphasized comfort or strength, such as Claire McCardell or Gilbert Adrian’s attires.xxiv Far from a universally accepted standard, critics already then deplored the New Look as an undoing of wartime emancipation and a regression to outmoded gender expectations. Part of the outcry, highlights Karal Ann Marling, was that women disappeared in their attire and looked “ridiculous”xxv —the look’s ultra-femininity not only being intellectually vexing, but also an aesthetic offense. Even a cursory consideration of how the New Look was worn in an everyday context reveals the look watered down for comfort and practicality.xxvi Far from mindlessly following every fad and fashion because they were told to, women made active decisions in how and why to adopt them. Ultimately, “clothes are connecting links in a creative tradition of image-making.”xxvii The question is not whether Maidenform’s dreams propelled women into further emulating a New Look ideal, but how the brand featured in a negotiated gender identity.
The industry’s “active persuasion and accommodation,”xxviii as Fields calls this dual process, crucially shapes Maidenform’s brand history, as well as the conditions that eventually spawned the Dreams campaign. For example, introduced in 1922 by Ida Rosenthal, William Rosenthal, and Enid Bissett, Maidenform’s first bra was a reaction against the preferred flat-chested look of the Flapper decade; the brand is even named in defiance of the popular “Boyish Form” bandeaux.xxix Allowing for “natural curves,” Rosenthal and Bissett designed a brassiere that cupped, separated, and uplifted the breasts, instead of pressing them against the torso. Although their intention had been to improve the fit of their dresses, the designers quickly found that the support garment generated sufficient demand for the business to focus solely on underwear.xxx Years later, Maidenform displayed a similar streak of resistance by being one of the last brands to adopt standardized cup sizing in 1949.xxxi Whereas the practice had become common in the 1930s, Maidenform stood firm: “[W]e would be betraying our customers, because we would be abandoning the principle which has made Maiden Form what it is today—the principle of individual designing.”xxxii Every woman, every female body, implies Rosenthal, is unique—and its garments must be tailor-made. Although this resistance to mass-production soon withered under the reality of market competition, the attitude lived on in Maidenform’s messaging: the expression of individuality, strongly underwritten by Bissett and the Rosenthals’ own visions, became a core component of the Dreams campaign.
One of the most telling and enduring proofs of Maidenform’s cultural resonance is the richness of its references in the wider media: parodies, jokes,xxxiii and literary referencesxxxiv abounded, their intended messages going far beyond the brand and ranging from positive allusions to neutral and negative connotations, but often in line with where the Maidenform girl had gone already. For example, during discussions on whether to admit female graduate students, opposing junior physics faculty in Urbana Champaign created a skit that suggested running an ad in Vogue boasting: “I dreamed I found a K minus [subatomic particle] in my Maidenform bra.”xxxv Time did away with direct relevance to Maidenform altogether and ran a few articles that spoofed the tagline in their titles—two of them addressed Soviet consumption, a compulsive Cold War preoccupation. In “I dreamed I went to Moscow in my Maidenform bra,” Time lists prominent American figures who had recently been travelling to the Soviet Union on a variety of business, and ends on a mention of Ida Rosenthal’s crossing for a “fashion survey.”xxxvi In “I dreamed I was a Marxist in my Maidenform bra,” the journalist chronicles Soviet women’s desire for lingerie and beauty products, without referencing Maidenform explicitly.xxxvii
So Maidenform’s Dreams had struck a chord and became a symbol for greater concerns than bras: femininity and consumption, the appropriate realm of female activity, and womanhood’s arsenal. How these tensions played out—both the good and the bad in terms of female empowerment—will be unraveled in the coming sections. Yet when all is said and done, never forget that it was selling underwear,towomen. Even though Marling refers to the New Look specifically when determining that fashion controversies were “just one more sign of the rampant sexual malaise of the times,”xxxviii the same can be said for the fuss Maidenform’s dream theme kicked up.
Advertising Naked Dreams: Fulfilling Freudian Wishes
“We can't present a woman as a sex kitten,” exclaims an Italian adman according to Time in 1963, in an article that goes on to assert that in Italy, “the Maidenform girl is photographed modestly at home and forgoes Freudian dreams.”xxxix To contemporary sensibilities, the “sex kitten” appellation might elicit a few chuckles, considering the sultriest of the Maidenform ads, “I dreamed I swayed the jury in my Maidenform bra,” remains leagues away from the overtly sexual allure of WWII pin-ups or the then-recent phenomenon of Playboy bunnies. Yet Time’s description of the American Maidenform woman’s domain—not at home, not modest, and beset by Freudian dreams—gives us an idea of the sexual connotations audiences would have attributed to the Dreams. Maidenform was selling sex—and everyone had noticed.
Figure 7. 
“I dreamed I swayed the jury in my Maidenform bra” (1963).
View full resolution
The intent was not to be risqué to the point of lasciviousness. In a Time article on Rosenthal, daughter and future CEO Beatrice Coleman assures the reader that “[w]e love double meanings, […] so long as the double meaning is decent.’”xl The company was aware and banked on the double-entendre in many of the ads, but insisted on doing so with decorum. While some of the ads had been quite cheeky (e.g., “I dreamed I stopped traffic in my Maidenform bra”), or allowed for multiple saucy interpretations (e.g., “I dreamed I got a lift in my Maidenform bra”), audiences seeking explicit eroticism would have had to dig very deep. In fact, the sauciest references were often hidden in the copy, rather than the tagline, if there was any copy that wasn’t too busy extolling the product’s features.
Instead, the campaign’s suggestiveness came from its distinctly Freudian references: the trope of the naked dream, and its partner-in-crime, the fantasy of wish fulfillment. Ironically, the most telling account of Dreams as a Freudian campaign can be found in the most infamous of attacks on advertising, Vance Packard’s The Hidden Persuaders (1957). The passage is worth quoting in full as it appears in the chapter, The Build-in Sexual Overtone, where Packard’s tirade against consumer manipulation—the main preoccupation of his entire book—takes aim at sex as a selling device:
The most controversial of the eye stoppers of this sort was the “I Dreamed I Stopped traffic in My Maidenform Bra” campaign. The situations varied but always the girl involved, dressed fully except that she wore only a bra above the waist, was wandering about among normally dressed people. The theory was that since she was dreaming, her undressed state was permissible. The ad men themselves argued about the wisdom of this ad and the deep-down effect it had on women seeing it. Some were convinced, after talking with their psychological consultants, that the scene depicted would simply produce an anxiety state in women since it represented a common oneiric, or dream, expression of the neurotic anxieties experienced by many women. Others in the trade, however, became convinced after checking their psychologists that the ad was sound because the wish to appear naked or scantily clad in a crowd is “present in most of us” and “represents a beautiful example of wish fulfillment.”xli

Figure 8. 
“I dreamed I stopped traffic in my Maidenform bra” (1949), referenced in Vance Packard’s The Hidden Persuaders.
View full resolution
There are several notable aspects to Packard’s description, but first things first: the Maidenform woman’s dream was clearly a psychological phenomenon with a “deep-down effect” that warranted commentary from experts. The experts agree: dreams are, as Freud emphasizes time and time again, the fulfillment of repressed wishes. What they disagree on is the desirability of this fulfillment, given the wish may be a neurosis. Freud himself sheds some light on the matter by explaining that the “embarrassing” naked dream originates in childhood memories of being partially or fully undressed in the presence of adults. In this pre-adulthood paradise, children expose their bodies without a hint of shame and even revel in their nudity, pleasures that are lost in the process of growing up. “[D]reams of being naked are dreams of exhibiting,”xlii he concludes, and the need to exhibit is a sexual neurosis. Naked dreams that are not embarrassing—for example, in which the dreamer feels no sense of shame—are less interesting, and Freud dismisses the state of undress as a secondary detail in the service of another secret desire.xliii Given the feebleness of this Freudian explanation, we can only wonder why one camp of Packard’s psychologists deem the naked dream a neurosis, while the other lauds it as fulfilling. A fair guess would be that the two camps represent opposite sides of the advertising-as-mind-control debate.
As ludicrous as this may seem to the contemporary reader, in the fifties, theories of the unconscious were having a field day. As Lawrence R. Samuel notes in Freud on Madison Avenue, the push towards conformity that typified middle-class society gave rise to such pressure that the fear of abnormality became a force to be reckoned with. Stories about the Soviet Union’s brainwashing superpowers fueled the American consumer’s “profound anxiety of not being in control, of losing one’s mind” and thereby inadvertently engaging in unsanctioned behavior.xliv Psychoanalytic theories unpacked and legitimized these anxieties,xlv and became an important source of scientific explanation. Since “keeping the wheels of capitalism spinning” was “one of our primary weapons to keep the Soviets at bay,”xlvi American marketers were looking for new ways to market increasingly undifferentiated products, and what better than tapping into the wealth of the (subconscious) human mind. Understanding the consumer’s “why” became Madison Avenue’s new golden standard, taking the act of consumption to “psychological-spiritual”xlvii heights. And while Motivation Research was certainly not novel, it had been in its infancy until a Freudian infusion lit a fire under its previously dubious methodology.
So the Dreams’ Freudian undertone was not a figment of Packard and Co.’s imaginations. Norman B. Norman, who had been with the Maidenform account from its Weintraub days, admitted as much when citing the Dreams as a prime example of a psychoanalytically inspired campaign:
A lot depends on the copywriter’s intuition. Self analysis. Ernest Jones says somewhere that Freud had this enormous ability to generalize from the particular. That’s what we want in copywriters. Everybody dreams, many people dream of running around naked; but they can’t talk about it. We make our copywriters talk about it.xlviii

What Norman was describing, in essence, was the “empathy” approach that Maidenform’s new ad agency, Norman, Craig & Kummel (NC&K), liked to call their Motivation Research-inspired creative process.xlix “Why advertise what everyone expects?” wonders Norman, in direct opposition to Rosser Reeves’s obsession with Unique Selling Propositions (USPs)—a school antithetical to anything nearing emotional engagement or psychological leverage.l Instead, give them some good old sympathy, and a thorough understanding of what they really want:
The theory of it is, the manufacturer is saying to the customer, “I know all about you.” And the customer thinks, subconsciously, “What a nice guy, he understands me; what a nice product…”li

When push comes to shove, Norman thought that the only meaningful way to be spending advertising dollars was through Freudian “unconscious suggestion.”lii
The golden boy of the Motivation Research movement (or unscrupulous instigator, depending on your point of view), and a great inspiration to Norman,liii was an Austrian immigrant well versed in Freudian psychology. Ernest Dichter struck at the heart of 1940s’ conflicted consumerism, his distinctly European ideas cutting down the Puritan morality that shrouded American consumption.liv Master of “the world of repressed symbolism,” one his main contributions to the field was the conceptualization of purchase decisions as creative expression.lv Consumers derived fulfillment by parsing and aggregating a plethora of product information holistically instead of piecemeal, which pushed Dichter to wonder about “the soul, the meaning of objects.”lvi In very concrete strategy terms, he postulated for the first time that a brand’s personality should match its consumer’s personality.lvii
The Choices of Mrs. Consumer: Discourses of Female Agency
It is wise to pause here and consider once more who the Maidenform consumer was: the all-round American woman, who incidentally was likely to be a housewife. “Mrs. Consumer,” who according to Kathy L. Peiss was born around the same time as “Organization Man,” was a consumer type whose feminine inclinations ultimately drove her purchase decisions: “The woman consumer was considered emotional and impulsive, driven by ‘inarticulate longings’ and ‘dormant desires.’”lviii In these aspects, she was a much better fit for the nascent advertising schools that stressed emotion, desire, and cultural embedding over product benefits, price points, and rationale. Concomitantly, advertisements began equating housework to homemaking, and vice versa—effectively effacing the boundaries between domestic drudgery and aspirational gratification.lix The campaign addressed its female audience at a time when their identities as women and as consumers had begun to conflate. In itself, this needn’t have translated into a sexist appraisal of women’s purchasing behavior, but given that mind manipulation was considered a real danger, it entailed that their agencies were snubbed due to her supposed dupability. As a case in point, Jessamyn Neuhaus unearthed a 1969 illustration of the housewife in The Grocer that shows even advertisers and retailers imagined her unattractive, obsessive, and simple-minded.lx She was, in the public perception, distastefully “at the mercy of her own consumer desires.”lxi
The problem of the female consumer was essentially tied to her status as a reproductive member of society, and thus not a legitimate member of the productive realm. A crystallizing text that both gave a voice to contemporaneous frustration and shaped future criticism was, of course, the Feminine Mystique. In 1963, Betty Friedan shocked the nation by exposing the cage in which society confined their women from birth, and the desperation to which this led when the marriage aspiration failed to produce enduring fulfillment. Proliferated by the media, advertising, and consumption, the “happy housewife heroine” narrative had become a noxious measuring standard for female identity, Friedan argues, limiting the opportunity for meaningful activities beyond hearth and home. The “problem that has no name,” as she coined it, took on epithetic dimensions, and all aspects of femininity were put under scrutiny—including consumption.lxii
As it happens, admen turned out to be acutely aware of the housewife’s position as a deeply frustrating status quo, and the debate of the appropriateness of her education raged in wider society.lxiii Her ultimate aspiration was recognized as demanding, often demeaning, and ultimately unfulfilling:
The modern educated girl does not have a free choice between her career and housework. She has no choice at all—it’s housework, period. Why wouldn’t she feel purposeless and disappointed if she has a talent and many years of study invested in science or music or writing but nevertheless has to bow to the dictate of our society that the only goals for a woman are marriage, having babies, and doing housework?

Why should it be necessary to reiterate that she is a complex creature, compounded of yearnings, daydreams, unfulfillments, buried hopes, satisfactions and frustrations both, eager for affection and praise? Probably even more than a man, apart from her everyday duties she moves in a world of emotions and feelings and moods and hopes.lxiv

Yet Pierre Martineau, the author of this quote and Chicago Tribune’s well-respected research director, falls short of Friedan’s elaborate explanation of the societal mechanism. His book, Motivation in Advertising, was more a defense of his trade (Motivation Research) against fear-mongering attacks such as The Hidden Persuaders, which had been propelled to best-selling status just a few months before.lxv Cheekily titled “Women are People,” his chapter dedicated to the dissatisfied housewife warns the reader that her role is in constant danger of obsolescence. The solution, he concludes, was to fill the void with Dichterian advertising.
But this was precisely the problem, says Friedan, who calls Martineau’s admission a “shrewd cheerful awareness”lxvi on the part of perpetrating advertisers. “The Sexual Sell” (chapter 9 in The Feminine Mystique) paints a consumer world that is geared towards perpetuating and expanding the domain of housewifery, at the cost of women’s advancement. “Somehow, somewhere, someone must have figured out that women will buy more things if they are kept in the underused, nameless-yearning, energy-to-get-rid-of state of being housewives.”lxvii Advertising fills women’s heads with images and ideas that only reinforce their strangling roles by filling them with vacuous meaning… Which includes the use of sex in advertising to target the lack of libidinal satisfaction apparently synonymous with housewifery.lxviii
To buttress her arguments, Friedan relied strongly on a debunking of Freudian wisdom that exonerated discourses of sexist difference, and on evidence presented in The Hidden Persuaders. Yet as Linda M. Scott details in Fresh Lipstick, both of these tactics turn out to be deeply problematic. While Friedan challenges the common narrative of women as libidinal creatures unable to reach (male) maturity, when it comes to advertising, she seems to forget her own argument that women have perfectly functioning judicious faculties. And though mass psychoanalysis was perceived as a very real threat, most of the evidence to that effect, and particularly the research presented by Packard and recycled by Friedan, was soon discredited.lxix Finally, Friedan also relied on a close-reading of select fiction pieces published in women’s magazines to substantiate her claims of the happy housewife narrative. Yet casting a wider net over the texts, which give some insight into the gender discourse of the times, Meyerowitz finds that mass culture presented a great many variety of narratives about the postwar woman, including pieces that expressed ambivalence towards domesticity, seriously questioned issues such as sexist wage practices, and did not shy from documenting, even promoting, women’s participation in public and political life. Friedan’s feminine mystique was, in the end, very much a product of her environment as well as a counteraction to it. Without discounting its importance, her seminal text remains “only one piece of the postwar cultural puzzle.”lxx
Another piece of the puzzle is Helen Gurley Brown’s Sex and the Single Girl, which truly shook the sensibilities of polite society. Gurley Brown, taking a radically different approach from contemporary Friedan, proposed a guide for single women that did not shy from sex, ambition, or consumption. To be “successfully single,” goes her advice, the working woman needed to indulge in the pleasure of “clothes, an apartment, vacations, entertainment…to create an aura of seductive elegance about you, so no one will ever be able to feel sorry for you.”lxxi Using consumption as a pleasure but also to carve out an image that resisted gender prejudice, the single girl chooses according to her desires without disregarding the value of money. Gurley Brown’s rules on saving (and spending) wisely illustrate the type of prioritization that doesn’t pass verdict over the necessity or morality of goods:
1.   Scrimp on what isn’t sexy or beautiful or really any fun, so you can afford what is.
2.   Don’t spend a sou on anything you don’t need. (You need iridescent gold eye shadow, but what about that essence-of-pine air purifier somebody was selling door-to-door?)
3.   Never pay more when you can pay less. Marvelon shelf paper is Marvelon shelf paper whether you buy it in a department store or the outlet house, where it is ten cents a roll cheaper.
4.   Economize on things that would bring you no extra happiness units if you spent twice as much. Are the guests really going to love you that much more and enjoy themselves double when you serve cracked Alaskan crab and jumbo prawns with cocktails instead of raw carrots and cauliflower with a good cheese dip?lxxii
The innovation of marketing in the late 1940s, Schwarzkopf and Gries remind us, had been the crystallization of a goods-oriented consumer culture: “goods had to be seen as the modern way to express, expand, and negotiate one’s personality.”lxxiii Gurley Brown’s gospel is a prime example of its application in the service of sexual empowerment, as much as the popularity of hats as essential signifiers of “women meaning business” in professional circles.lxxiv
Figure 9. 
Displaying sexual assertiveness, Gurley Brown style: “Look who’s after big game…me!.…The most dangerous figure in the Congo. Completely ambushed by admiring glances for my fabulous form. No girl on the hunt ever had more fatal ammunition than a Maidenform bra.” (1954)
View full resolution
In the light of this evidence, it seems that the Dreams would have had very little subliminal sway over its consumer; women did not gobble up the campaign as some sort of catharsis for her neuroses. Based on its other distinct advertising efforts, it appears that Maidenform knew as much as well. Consider, for example, Figures 10 and 11, which co-existed with the Dreams campaign and appeared in at least one of the same publications. These attention-seeking messages quite literally expound the “wow!” factor that Maidenform’s bras guarantee, and stick to a Reevesian pitch of the product’s superiority. Figure 11 even does away with the demonstrative illustration, relying exclusively on the bold exclamation. Figure 12 takes yet another approach, and suggesting the reader “look twice”—stop and consider—referring to the common trope of a woman’s dual identity. Finally, the hardest sell is evident in Figure 13, which not only promises the moon (it improves with washing!), but also provides product specs, price points, and a money-back guarantee. The Dreams campaign, interestingly, makes its appearance on the depicted product packaging. Although important, it is by no means the sole focus of the sales pitch.
Figure 10. 
“Wow!” is the verdict on Maidenform’s bra Twice-Over. New York Times, 1958.
View full resolution
Figure 11. 
The illustration becomes obsolete. New York Times, 1958.
View full resolution
Figure 12. 
“Look Twice!” New York Times, 1958.
View full resolution
Figure 13. 
A hard sell - from product specs to price points, this ad for Twice Over makes dissatisfaction impossibility with its money-back guarantee. New York Times, 1958.
View full resolution
Figure 14. 
“I’ll buy that dream!” Note that here, the woman’s face is anonymized to accommodate identification with the statement. New York Times, 1957.
View full resolution
In the end, consumers needed persuading beyond any therapeutic magic the campaign had to offer, or Maidenform wouldn’t have wasted good media money on alternate messaging. Harping on product quality and economic soundness seemed a sensible supplementary strategy. So after all the agitation it caused, where does this leave Maidenform’s dream theme? Was Packard right in decrying it just an “eye-stopper,” meant to distract consumers with sex and, once their attentions had been caught, bombard them with product specs? Figure 15 begins to hint at the richness provided by the dream theme, where the consumer is urged to pick up the bra, try it on, experience its perfection, and purchase it (for $2.50). Wanamaker’s “It’s no dream you look lovelier in your Maidenform bra” (Figure 4), similarly grounds Maidenform’s ethereal promises in the reality of the product. These wish fulfillments take on very tangible dimensions, and so there seems to be more to the dream than a Freudian probe can reveal.
Indecent Exposure: Boundaries Prodded, Boundaries Challenged
What is striking about Packard’s description of the Dreams campaign is that he pays little attention to what the Maidenform woman decided to do with her oneiric freedom. Instead, her nakedness takes precedence and is either lauded or deplored as an expression of suppressed desire. What this desire is—beyond appearing in the nude—seems moot. This is a striking analytical omission for a campaign that not only has her shopping, but also cuts her in half, or transforms her into an eskimo. To this point, a second feature of Packard’s account deserves closer attention: contrary to his recollection, the “girl involved” actually never wanders amongst other “normally dressed people.”lxxv If bystanders are depicted, and there are only a few examples, they are hand drawn in a sketchy fashion as part of the background, and they do not seem to take any notice of the Maidenform model (see Figure 8). Packard’s version emphasizes her flagrant disregard of the norm by imagining a contrasting audience—she is transgressive in a world of clothed normality.
The inclusion of this imagined audience is important because Maidenform broke one of the key rules in lingerie advertising: the sanctity of privacy. Until then, Fields documents, lingerie ads were always strongly situated within the boundaries of the bedroom, the boudoir, or the bathroom. They depicted women tending to themselves, having some “me time,” or engaging in a beauty ritual. Sometimes they gaze in the mirror, or they admire their bodies.lxxvi All solitary, private activities that divorced the eroticization of the body from the rest of life. No notions of public identity, or even the humdrum of everyday life. Sometimes, there might be the suggestion of a peeping tom, or a voyeuristic partner, and these served to confirm the status of the viewer as a transgressing onlooker,lxxvii further emphasizing the separation of her sphere from the audience’s sphere.
Other ads preferred modeling underwear on “invisible” women, giving the garments a phantasmic quality as they float in the air in perfect shape (Figure 16). Or, women’s bodies would be cropped to the area of interest. All these techniques, Fields summarizes, contributed to the objectification, fetishization, and commoditization of women’s bodies—a common critique of lingerie advertising.lxxviii Whether such readings are fair would require another discussion altogether, but these typifications do highlight that Maidenform departed significantly from the lingerie-ad formula. The Maidenform woman was appearing in public, in full view, and if you happened to know her identity, she was definitely recognizable. Furthermore, given the notable absence of other people in the frame, Maidenform dispelled any conventional notions of voyeurism. Deprived of anonymity or privacy, she was most certainly exposed. And she doesn’t seem bothered.
Figure 16. 
An example of the invisible woman. Vogue, 1947.lxxix
View full resolution
It bothered her audiences, though. One famous 1962 spoof that ran in Mad magazine joked, “I dreamed I was arrested for indecent exposure in my Maidenform bra,”lxxx referring to charges of outraging public decency as if she were an exhibitionist of some kind. As one respondent in a 1956 survey comments: “It combines dress and undress. She would be decenter if she were entirely in her underwear.”lxxxi This incisive observation goes hand in hand with the “attraction of concealment” supposedly typical for lingerie ads, and the sexual curiosity such concealment generates:
[W]hen anything is constantly exposed to view, it leaves nothing to the imagination, tends to be perceived as ordinary, and eventually, is hardly noticed at all. The eye becomes jaded; habitual nudity is notably unerotic.lxxxii

Lingerie ads may be suggestive of a naked body, but this state is acceptable within the confines detailed above—within those parameters, the model is still adequately clothed. It is when these boundaries are challenged that the house of cards comes tumbling down. By clothing one part of the whole, but exposing the other, the Maidenform woman is more exhibitive than the pin-up girl would ever be. She has a socially accepted identity. And she is engaging with the world. As they say, she owns it.
Figure 17. 
Spoof published in MadMagazine.
View full resolution
All the ado about Maidenform didn’t have so much to do with sex in a literal, or even Freudian, sense. It came from the conflation of the private and the public spheres, which reached deep into doubts on the nature of femininity. Once these barriers were breaking down, who was to say what would remain of civilized society…. And some measures were taken to protect it. In 1961, a New York state law was signed to prevent advertisers from using the names of nonprofit organizations. The law was implied to have been spurred on by Maidenform’s transgressions:
The girl in the Maidenform bra will have to be more careful from now on about the places she visits in her celebrated dreams. Singing without a blouse on in Carnegie Hall will, for example, be out.lxxxiii

As this article was titled “I dreamed I was in court,” is it only coincidence that the actual ad “I dreamed I swayed the jury” (Figure 7) appeared only two years later? All jesting aside, the fear that consumption would invade the sanctity of cultural and moral spaces was wider spread than just the lack of chastity implied by Maidenform:
It was none too soon to draw the line. [We] might soon have found such fine institutions as St. Patrick's Cathedral, the Red Cross, Columbia University or the American Legion linked with diapers, liquors, and fertilizers.lxxxiv

Diapers, liquors, and fertilizers—all shining examples of the postwar consumer goods explosion and the nefarious advertising in its wake. Representative of these goods, Maidenform’s products were not considered worthy of affiliation with these “fine institutions.” The implication, of course, was that they were too frivolous and private a product to be legitimately included in the morally superior domains of charity, religion, and education—a prejudice that most beauty and fashion products suffered from.lxxxv A less judgmental but just as telling example of Maidenform’s sublimation is its use in “I dreamed I was a Marxist in my Maidenform bra,” a Time article from 1962. The article reports that women in the Soviet Union are once again looking out for cosmetics, fashion, jewelry, and other beauty accessories, now that “glamour has become one of the Marxist virtues.”lxxxvi Maidenform is never referred to beyond the title, but it looms large as a symbol of a consumerist ideology.
Conclusion: From Sex Kitten to Renaissance Girl
Once she starts dreaming there’s just no stopping her.

– Philip H. Dougherty on the Maidenform woman, New York Times, 1967lxxxvii
As she wraps up Intimate Affairs: Women, Lingerie, and Sexuality, Fields concludes “undergarments are critical to the image, because they bring the body into culture in a manner that an unclothed body would not.”lxxxviii The Dreams campaign navigates the postwar gender identity strife by placing the (private) female body firmly in the public eye. Through a Freudian narrative that resonated with concurrent beliefs, it legitimized the Maidenform woman’s semi-nudity, but also opened doors for her to explore a variety of new situations and occupations. Gradually, the Maidenform woman will have done so much more than seemed plausible in 1949.
Maidenform’s awareness of this journey is evident from the change of tone in one of the last Dreams ads in 1969. Proudly proclaiming “I dreamed I made more of myself in my Maidenform bra” (Figure 18), this Maidenform woman doesn’t need any “pointing out,” but instead strives for “rounding out” (let’s leave the puns aside, for a moment). It’s the post-Friedan, post-Gurley Brown woman on her way to fulfillment. The campaign was dropped on the cusp of the seventies because, explains president Beatrice Coleman, “We felt that the ads no longer appealed to younger women.”lxxxix Their consumers had outgrown the need to dream these activities—they were living them.
To this day, Maidenform hasn’t exhausted the Dreams goldmine—it continues to inspire and inform its messaging, from product names to billboard ads on Times Square.xc In fact, the Dreams campaign itself proved difficult to stay away from for very long. Revived in 1972 in the form of “Maidenform, you never know where she’ll turn up,” NC&K attempted to update the message to the reality of the seventies. Whether they struck a positive or a negative chord is up for debate.
Figure 18. 
“I dreamed I made more of myself in my Maidenform Bra,” 1969.
View full resolution
There are a few strands of inquiry that would do well with further elaboration. For one, a closer look at the ads’ copy and aesthetics would be likely to cast the campaign in even more nuance than suggested here. For example, cross-referencing the taglines with popular culture, and especially in relation to female typologies, is bound to yield some interesting nuggets of identity construction. Additionally, a lot of the copy softened the sexual innuendos through humor, and references to play—both of which are tactics with subversive potential meriting more scrutiny. Finally, some of the women who witnessed the first ads in 1949 would have been well into middle or old age by the end of the campaign. Twenty years is a substantial amount of time for a brand to harp on the same message, and one cannot help but wonder how exactly Maidenform kept in touch with this growing, and changing, audience. As if it hadn’t seen enough excitement, the 1950s also boasts the birth of teenage culture, and Maidenform produced more than a few items appealing to this new market with its own identity markers and rituals. Buying your first bra as a flat-chested teenager became a rite of passage, not a purchase made out of perceived physical necessity, and brands responded by advertising on healthy physical development “from the start.”xci
All-in-all, the Dreams campaign is a treasure-trove for those with an interest in re-endowing the consumer of the 1950s and 1960s with whatever power she did have, making the story of twentieth century consumption her story, too. It is this dual process that is often written out of history, and yields a marketing narrative that implies some form of forceful imposition on the consumer that only benefits the producer. At the end of the day, criticism leveraged against Maidenform highlights the unease with which the relationship between consumption and gender is viewed, and especially when the goods consumed are of an intimate nature. Until these tensions ebb, we can only admire the Maidenform woman who in 1962, perhaps heralding the publications of The Feminine Mystique and Sex and the Single Girl, dreamed she “took the bull by the horns.”
Astrid Van den Bossche  
Astrid Van den Bossche is a doctoral student in Management Studies at Saïd Business School, University of Oxford. Under the supervision of Professor Linda Scott, her research spans across marketing history, consumer culture theory, and branding. Prior to beginning her studies at Saïd Business School, Astrid obtained a Master of Studies in Film Aesthetics at the University of Oxford. She then taught as an Alumni Tutor at her undergraduate college, University College Maastricht in The Netherlands, before completing a Master in Management at London Business School. Her particular interest in branding and marketing was awakened during her work experience as a brand strategist.

Contact details
Saïd Business School Park End Street
Oxford,
OX1 1HP, UK
E-mail: astrid.vandenbossche@sbs.ox.ac.uk
References
“Advertising: That Local Touch.” Time. Accessed March 27, 2014. http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,870564,00.html.
Banner, Lois W. Women in Modern America: A Brief History. 3rd ed. Fort Worth; London: Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 1995.
Brown, Helen Gurley. Sex and the Single Girl: The Unmarried Woman’s Guide to Men. Open Road Media, 2012 [1962].
Brumberg, Joan Jacobs. The Body Project: An Intimate History of American Girls. New York: Vintage Books, 1998.
“Business: I Dreamed I Was in Court.” Time. Accessed March 27, 2014. http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,895327,00.html.
“Business: L Dreamed I Was a Tycoon in My Maidenform bra.” Time, 1960. http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,871790,00.html.
Carlston, Walter. “Advertising: Agencies Within an Agency.” New York Times, April 29, 1966.
Coleman, Barbara J. “Maidenform(ed): Images of American Women in the 1950.” Genders, 1994, 3–3.
Cook, Joan. “Figure Control Builds Billion-Dollar Industry.” New York Times. February 8, 1960. ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The New York Times (1851-2010) with Index (1851-1993).
Deutsch, Claudia H. “Dreaming of Bras for the Modern Woman.” New York Times, September 28, 2005, sec. Business / Media & Advertising. http://www.nytimes.com/2005/09/28/business/media/28adco.html.
Dougherty, Philip H. “Advertising: Years of Maidenform Dreams.” New York Times, September 10, 1967. ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The New York Times (1851-2010) with Index (1851-1993).
Gross, Michael. “Chanel Today.”New York Times, July 28, 1985, sec. Magazine. http://www.nytimes.com/1985/07/28/magazine/chanel-today.html.
Fields, Jill. An Intimate Affair: Women, Lingerie, and Sexuality. Berkeley; London: University of California Press, 2007.
Freud, Sigmund. The Interpretation of Dreams. Vol. 4. 24 vols. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. London: Vintage, 2001.
Friedan, Betty. The Feminine Mystique. London: Penguin, 2010 [1963].
Kaiser, David. “The Postwar Suburbanization of American Physics.” American Quarterly 56, no. 4 (December 1, 2004).
“Maidenform Blushes.” Time. Accessed March 27, 2014. http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,923573,00.html.
Marling, Karal Ann. As Seen on TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s. Cambridge, Mass; London: Harvard University Press, 1994.
Martineau, Pierre. Motivation in Advertising; Motives That Make People Buy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957.
Mayer, Martin. Madison Avenue U.S.A. London: The Bodley Head, 1958.
Meyerowitz, Joanne Jay. “Beyond the Feminine Mystique: A Reassessment of Postwar Mass Culture, 1946–1958.” In Not June Cleaver: Women and Gender in Postwar America, 1945-1960, edited by Joanne Jay Meyerowitz, 229–62. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1994.
Neuhaus, Jessamyn. Housework and Housewives in Modern American Advertising: Married to the Mop. 1st ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
O’Barr, William M. “Sex and Advertising.” Advertising & Society Review 12, no. 2. Accessed April 17, 2014.
Packard, Vance. The Hidden Persuaders. Penguin Books, 1981 [1957].
Peiss, Kathy Lee. “American Women and the Making of Modern Consumer Culture.” presented at the Phi alpha Theta lecture, State University of New York, March 26, 1998. http://www.albany.edu/jmmh/vol1no1/peiss-text.html.
Pohl, Frederik. The Space Merchants. London: Gollancz, 1953.
Rubenstein, Hal. “How They Stole the Story.” The New York Times, October 24, 1993, sec. Magazine. http://www.nytimes.com/1993/10/24/magazine/how-they-stole-thestory.html.
“Russia: I Dreamed I Was a Marxist In My Maidenform Bra.” Time. Accessed March 27, 2014. http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,940079,00.html.
Rutherford, Paul. A World Made Sexy: Freud to Madonna. University of Toronto Press, 2007.
Samuel, Lawrence R. Freud on Madison Avenue: Motivation Research and Subliminal Advertising in America. University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013.
Schwarzkopf, Stefan, and Rainer Gries. Ernest Dichter and Motivation Research: New Perspectives on the Making of Postwar Consumer Culture. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.
Scott, Linda M. Fresh Lipstick: Redressing Fashion and Feminism. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Snyder, Jennifer, Mimi Minnick, Alison Oswald, and David Haberstich. “Maidenform Collection, 1922-1997: Historical Note,” October 16, 2012. National Museum of American History. http://amhistory.si.edu/archives/d7585.htm.
Steele, Valerie. Fashion and Eroticism: Ideals of Feminine Beauty from the Victorian Era to the Jazz Age. New York: Oxford University Press, 1985.
“The New Look Revolution / The Story of Dior / The House of Dior / Dior Official Website.” Accessed April 21, 2014. http://www.dior.com/couture/en_gb/the-house-of-dior/the-story-of-dior/the-new-look-revolution.
“World: I Dreamed I went to Moscow in my Maidenform bra.” Time. Accessed March 27, 2014. http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,870321,00.html.
Footnotes
i. Barbara J. Coleman, “Maidenform(ed): Images of American Women in the 1950,” Genders 3, no. 3 (1994): 5.

ii. Ibid.

iii. Ibid.

iv. Paul Rutherford, A World Made Sexy: Freud to Madonna (University of Toronto Press, 2007).

v. Jill Fields, An Intimate Affair: Women, Lingerie, and Sexuality (Berkeley; London: University of California Press, 2007), 287.

vi. Ibid.

vii. Joan Cook, “Figure Control Builds Billion-Dollar Industry,” New York Times, February 8, 1960, ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The New York Times (1851-2010) with Index (1851-1993) par. 2.

viii. Confirmed in Philip H. Dougherty, “Advertising: Years of Maidenform Dreams,” New York Times, September 10, 1967, ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The New York Times (1851-2010) with Index (1851-1993). Paul Rutherford, however, suggests that Filius might have gotten the idea from a discarded campaign for Seamprufe slips formulated at her former agency by art director Herman Davis. See Rutherford, A World Made Sexy. The story further complicates with occasional attributions to Norman, Craig & Kummel’s (NC&K) copywriter Kitty D’Alessio. However, it seems unlikely she would have been the first to devise the campaign, as NC&K was founded in 1955, after buying out Weintraub. The agency thus inherited Maidenform’s business. See Martin Mayer, Madison Avenue U.S.A.

ix. William M. O’Barr, “Sex and Advertising,” Advertising & Society Review 12, no. 2, accessed April 17, 2014.

x. Fields, An Intimate Affair. Also see Google digital newspaper archives.

xi. “Maidenform Blushes,” Time, accessed March 27, 2014. The campaign ran in full in the U.K. but also reached countries like Spain with tailored activities for the Maidenform woman: “I dreamed I was a toreador in my Maidenform bra” (1951).

xii. Jennifer Snyder et al., “Maidenform Collection, 1922-1997: Historical Note,” October 16, 2012, National Museum of American History, http://amhistory.si.edu/archives/d7585.htm. Also see: Michael Gross, “Chanel Today,” The New York Times, July 28, 1985.

xiii. Martin Mayer, Madison Avenue U.S.A. (London: The Bodley Head, 1958), 64.

xiv. Cited in Mayer, Madison Avenue, 65. See also Paul Rutherford, A World Made Sexy: Freud to Madonna (University of Toronto Press, 2007), 94.

xv. Rutherford, A World Made Sexy.

xvi. Ibid.

xvii. Lois W. Banner, Women in Modern America: A Brief History, 3rd ed. (Fort Worth; London: Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 1995).

xviii. Fields, An Intimate Affair, 256.

xix. Joanne Jay Meyerowitz, Not June Cleaver: Women and Gender in Postwar America, 1945-1960 (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1994).

xx. Fields, An Intimate Affair,, 264.

xxi. Fields notes that women were less affected by job losses during the Great Depression than men, and thus gender anxiety in relation to employment had begun long before World War II. Ibid, 105.

xxii. “The New Look Revolution / The Story of Dior / The House of Dior / Dior Official Website,” accessed April 21, 2014.

xxiii. Meyerowitz, Not June Cleaver.

xxiv. Fields, An Intimate Affair.

xxv. Karal Ann Marling, As Seen on TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s (Cambridge, Mass; London: Harvard University Press, 1994), 11.

xxvi. Fields, An Intimate Affair, 265.

xxvii. Valerie Steele, Fashion and Eroticism: Ideals of Feminine Beauty from the Victorian Era to the Jazz Age (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), 47.

xxviii. Fields, An Intimate Affair, 257-8.

xxix. Snyder et al., “Maidenform Collection, 1922-1997.”

xxx. Ibid.

xxxi. Fields, An Intimate Affair.

xxxii. Ibid, 102.

xxxiii. For example: “I dreamed I was an Irish Airline hostess in my Erin Go Bragh” Philip H. Dougherty, “Advertising: Years of Maidenform Dreams,” New York Times, September 10, 1967, ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The New York Times (1851-2010) with Index (1851-1993) par. 9. Here’s another: “I dreamed I went to buy you a Cadillac in my Maidenform bra … but I was flat bust.” Hal Rubenstein, “How They Stole the Story,” The New York Times, October 24, 1993, par. 14.

xxxiv. See Frederik Pohl, The Space Merchants (London: Gollancz, 1953).

xxxv. David Kaiser, “The Postwar Suburbanization of American Physics,” American Quarterly 56, no. 4 (December 1, 2004), 876.

xxxvi. “World: I dreamed I went to Moscow in my Maidenform bra.” Time, accessed March 27, 2014, last par.

xxxvii. “Russia: I Dreamed I Was a Marxist In My Maidenform Bra,” Time, accessed March 27, 2014.

xxxviii. Karal Ann Marling, As Seen on TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s (Cambridge, Mass; London: Harvard University Press, 1994) p.11.

xxxix. “Advertising: That Local Touch,” Time, accessed March 27, 2014, par. 3.

xl. “Business: I Dreamed I Was a Tycoon in My Maidenform Bra,” Time, 1960.

xli. Vance Packard, The Hidden Persuaders (Penguin Books, 1981), 76.

xlii. Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, vol. 4, The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud (London: Vintage, 2001), 245.

xliii. Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams.

xliv. Lawrence R. Samuel, Freud on Madison Avenue: Motivation Research and Subliminal Advertising in America (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013), 12.

xlv. Linda M. Scott, Fresh Lipstick: Redressing Fashion and Feminism (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005).

xlvi. Samuel, Freud on Madison Avenue, 14.

xlvii. Stefan Schwarzkopf and Rainer Gries, Ernest Dichter and Motivation Research: New Perspectives on the Making of Postwar Consumer Culture (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010) p. 27.

xlviii. Mayer, Madison Avenue U.S.A., 44.

xlix. Walter Carlston, “Advertising: Agencies Within an Agency,” New York Times, April 29, 1966.

l. See excerpts from Rosser Reeves’ Reality in Advertising in the 15.2 issue of Advertising & Society Review for a taster of Reeves’ “inculcation’ mentality.” Also see Mayer, Madison Avenue U.S.A., 64.

li. Mayer, Madison Avenue U.S.A., 44.

lii. Ibid.

liii. Samuel, Freud on Madison Avenue.

liv. Ibid.

lv. Schwarzkopf and Gries, Ernest Dichter and Motivation Research, 9. Also see Dichter’s The Strategy of Desire (1958).

lvi. Ibid, 9.

lvii. Samuel, Freud on Madison Avenue.

lviii. Kathy Lee Peiss, “American Women and the Making of Modern Consumer Culture” (presented at the Phi alpha Theta lecture, State University of New York, March 26, 1998), par. 9.

lix. Jessamyn Neuhaus, Housework and Housewives in Modern American Advertising: Married to the Mop, 1st ed.. (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011).

lx. Ibid.

lxi. Ibid, 216.

lxii. Betty Friedan, The Feminine Mystique (London: Penguin, 1963).

lxiii. Lois W. Banner, Women in Modern America: A Brief History, 3rd ed. (Fort Worth; London: Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 1995).

lxiv. Pierre Martineau, Motivation in Advertising; Motives That Make People Buy (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957), 83.

lxv. Samuel, Freud on Madison Avenue.

lxvi. Friedan, The Feminine Mystique, 167.

lxvii. Ibid, 166.

lxviii. Ibid.

lxix. Scott, Fresh Lipstick.

lxx. Joanne Jay Meyerowitz, “Beyond the Feminine Mystique: A Reassessment of Postwar Mass Culture, 1946–1958,” in Not June Cleaver: Women and Gender in Postwar America, 1945-1960, ed. Joanne Jay Meyerowitz (Temple University Press, 1994), 229–62 p.231.

lxxi. Helen Gurley Brown, Sex and the Single Girl: The Unmarried Woman’s Guide to Men (Open Road Media, 2012), 139.

lxxii. Brown, Sex and the Single Girl, 141-2.

lxxiii. Schwarzkopf and Gries, Ernest Dichter and Motivation Research, 281.

lxxiv. Marling, As Seen on TV.

lxxv. Vance Packard, The Hidden Persuaders (Penguin Books, 1981), 76.

lxxvi. Fields, An Intimate Affair.

lxxvii. Ibid.

lxxviii. Ibid.

lxxix. Fields, An Intimate Affair, 177.

lxxx. Claudia H. Deutsch, “Dreaming of Bras for the Modern Woman,” The New York Times, September 28, 2005, sec. Business / Media & Advertising, http://www.nytimes.com/2005/09/28/business/media/28adco.html.

lxxxi. Leo Burnett 1956 research cited in Mayer, Madison Avenue U.S.A, 65.

lxxxii. Valerie Steele, Fashion and Eroticism: Ideals of Feminine Beauty from the Victorian Era to the Jazz Age (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), 42.

lxxxiii. “Business: I Dreamed I Was in Court,” Time, accessed March 27, 2014, par. 1.

lxxxiv. Ibid, par. 2.

lxxxv. Scott, Fresh Lipstick.

lxxxvi. “Russia: I Dreamed I Was a Marxist In My Maidenform Bra,” Time, accessed March 27, 2014, par. 1.

lxxxvii. Philip H. Dougherty, “Advertising: Years of Maidenform Dreams,” New York Times, September 10, 1967, ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The New York Times (1851-2010) with Index (1851-1993) par. 8.

lxxxviii. Fields, An Intimate Affair, 277.

lxxxix. “Maidenform Blushes,” Time, accessed March 27, 2014, http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,923573,00.html.

xc. See Philip H. Dougherty, “Advertising: Years of Maidenform Dreams,” New York Times, September 10, 1967, ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The New York Times (1851-2010) with Index (1851-1993).

xci. Joan Jacobs Brumberg, The Body Project: An Intimate History of American Girls (New York: Vintage Books, 1998).

Copyright © 2013 The Advertising Educational Foundation, Inc.
Advertising & Society Review
Volume 15, Issue 2, 2014

Research Areas
Social Sciences > Business and Society
Recommend
Email a link to this page
  
View Citation
Save Citation
Subject Headings
Advertising campaigns -- United States -- History -- 20th century.
Women in advertising -- United States -- History -- 20th century.
Brassieres -- United States -- Marketing -- History -- 20th century.
Related Content
Selling Truth: How Nike 
Selling Truth: How Nike 
Warring Images: Fashion and the Women's Magazines 1941-1945 
Warring Images: Fashion and the Women's Magazines 1941-1945 
Classic Campaigns - "It's Gotta Be the Shoes": Nike, Mike and Mars and the "Sneaker Killings" 
Classic Campaigns - "It's Gotta Be the Shoes": Nike, Mike and Mars and the "Sneaker Killings" 
You have access to this content
Free sample
Open Access
Restricted Access
Welcome to Project MUSE

Use the Search box at the top of the page to find book and journal content. Refine results with the filtering options on the left side of the results page. Use the Browse box to browse a selection of books and journals.

Connect with Project MUSE

Join our Facebook Page
Follow us on Twitter
Project MUSE | 2715 North Charles Street | Baltimore, Maryland USA 21218 | (410) 516-6989 | About | Contact | Help | Tools | Order

©2014 Project MUSE. Produced by The Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Milton S. Eisenhower Library.