Markets Consumers and the State 1925-1955
Stefan Schwarzkopf

p176
Empire Marketing Board - conducted research that allowed it to segment target market by classifying national newspapers and mags, by placing different styles of ads in each of the diff classes
Class A - e.g. The Times, rec adverts that focused on cultural and economic aspects of the empire
Class B papers - e.g. The Daily Mail got ads that focused on specific commodities that consumers should buy
Class C papers e.g. News of the World, John bull and Class D paper s(Good housekeeping)  received dialogue style or gossipy ads
Class E papers (targeting working classes and Labour Party votes - supplied with ads that made the case for the Empire form a working class and employment point of view
Class F papers (trade papers) carried ads that persuaded storekeepers to stock the priciest for which demand had ben created in the papers of classes B to E.  
[EMB report dated 1927]

[I have seen examples of these! but also not, as quite a few of the same appear across classes]

experts at EMB performed basic operations such as market segmentation, targeting and positioning ad messages, and coordinating demand-oriented (pull) and supply oriented push advertising. 

keyed ads - readers encouraged to send back coupon with unique no to receive booklet - judge efficacy of campaign. (1928, Milk, Daily Mail) 

p179
concern for people as citizens and consumers motivated got depts to treat consumer research more seriously. Ad agencies benefited directly from the transfer of marketing and stat knowhow from these depts when building up their own in house research depts.  Early research and publicity work for the EMB drew heavily on economic report written for Ministry of Agriculture. 

p184
Social survey unit - National Food survey and consumer expenditure surveys - included surveys on expenditures and behaviour in areas that could not easily be covered by official stats, e.g.. on clothes dying and cleaning, clothes mending and alterations, shoe repairs, domestic property improvements, hairdressing, cosmetics, vacations, betting and meals consumed in catering establishments. (all between 1948 and 1950)

p187 abundantly clear that market and consumer research was not a birth child of the market place alone, but emerged as a set of instruments within he public sector, often driven by govt departments. History of CSR has to be understood in a wider framework of politics and society ,not just a business history. 

