Mass Obs
reading and non reading surveys
1947
as many as one person in 3 does not read books - disproportionately married people, women and the less well-off or less well-educated. 

non reading of newspapers is less common
Sunday papers read by all but 8% (92%)
dailies by all but 13% (87%)

women and unskilled working classes are most in evidence, but it is the 16 to 20s who read newspapers least of all. 

p14
Sunday non readers - more than usually in politics, foreign affairs, reading, social work, religion and classical music. Below average interest in sport, films, dancing pub going etc. Sunday papers tend to be read with different  purpose to that of the weedy reader - development towards feature and gossip rather than serious news, seems likely that this leads the Sunday non-reader to avoid the paper. Daily paper non-readers tend to be apathetic and ill-informed and their lack of interest is a negative feeling. 

p15
reading daily papers can be expensive - middle class Panel av weekly income of £11 10s. one man says he cannot afford daily papers: I don't feel like wasting the money, it adds up. I glance at odd papers, buy a sSunday paper and the local weekly rag and listen to th eBBC news instead. 
lack of time in the week - take a paper on Sunday. read all the news of the week.

p16
in larger towns evening papers replace the National dailies, esp among people wh are short of reading time until the evening, or provide the type of information people want (e.g. radio programmes) 

p17 
Hulton Readership Survey 1948 
significant predominance of readership among Men - the times, daily express, daily herald, news chronicle, reynolds news, empire news
sig predom of women: daily graphic
papers with fairly even distribution: daily mail, daily telegraphy, daily mirror, news of the world, people, sunday pictorial, sunday express, sunday dispatch, sunday chronicle, sunday graphic sunday times Observer. 


p18
upper income (above/below £400)
Times Sunday Times, Daily Mail, Observer, Daily telegraph, Daily  Graphic, Sunday Express, 
lower
daily mirror, daily herald, news of the world, empire news sunday pictorial, people


sig drom under 45 yo
men: daily mirror, sunday pictorial, daily worker
women: daily mirror, sdunay pictorial, news of the world, empire, reynolds
sig predom over 45
Men: news chronicle, daily graphic, The times, Sunday Chronicle, Daily Telegraphy Sunday Times, Observer
Weomen: as above but sub Daily mail for the times.


p19
newspaper reading at libraries v different to home
papers on transport more prolonged time(6mins) - influenced by journey, evening papers on transport spend even longer (8mins)
less time given to picture papers- daily graphic and daily mirror. 

p26
general analysis of all daily paper items actually remembered by daily paper readers
38% political news items 				30 (sun)
30% items of home news				26
17%  feature inc gossip					30
11% sport											7
2% comics and cartoons				6
2% adverts										1

less that an quarter of Daily Mirror space consist of news times and in the times the proportion is not much higher

roughly one third of the papers read by th panel group i sdveloted to news, yet two thirds of the items tha take the biggest impression on them ra news items. 

those with higher intelligence and education read papers throughly but their recall shows that their reading is done with thought and interest. 

p27 
Sunday papers
impression news items made was slighter than that made by features. Sunday reading - casually, with a feeling of relaxation rathe than duty


advertisements is not stated as the main section of things they like, unless in local weekly papers (24%)
news
daily: 27, sunday: 21, evening: 38, local weekly, 47%
feature articles
d: 10, s: 24, e: 6, lw: 4
editorial
d: 10, s:4, e: 2, lw: 1


p34
men more interested in women than men in news and editorials, women read letters, comics and look at pics more than men. On all semi intellectual matters omen tend to be less interested than men, less inclined to have an opinion, only when question involves a personal or emotional issue or has fairly direct personal application that their interest becomes stronger. 

educational left - increases imptc attached to papers politics, also develops interest in news, ed, and feature artcle. Less well educated give more impt to news and gossip in the sunday paper and more to sport. 

p36
"I like to hear about murders, I hear about all the murders going on, how it all  happened. Proper blood curler for that sort of thing I am" Woman, unskilled working class Daily Mirror reader

best news is well spiced w crime and sensation but it is all something to read, many will accept almost anything more or less uncritically. 

p37 
some people object to news consisting largely of gossip and scandal - I hate reading about other people's dirty linen. 

p100
class education and serious interests decide that people shall read either the Daily Telegraph or Times, politics may detainee which. 

Factors such as sport and special creatures play a big part in choice between daily express and daily mail and to lesser extent, the news chronicle. 

p99
1 in 5 ignorant of their paper's politics - by  no means always associated with politics. 

p111
Daily Mail
read by 1 adult in 7
favoured slightly more than the other popular papers (express and mirror and herald) by higher income gropus, older people and older women. Just over half readers are Conservativ, a quarter Labour and  1 in 7 are undecided or non-party. 
Readers are little interest in politics or serious news. Very interested in feature articles, more so than readers of any other daily paper. Don Iddon particularly popular. 

p113
The Tims is read by 1  adult in 50 with very pronounced emphasis on the older and higher income groups. 2/5 readers are conservatives, 1/4 liberal, 1/8 Liberal and 1/5 undecided or non partly. Too small a sample to portray them adequately, many indications to suggest they're similar to Daily Telegraph, in liking for unsensational reportage and almost togal lack of interest in sport and pictures. 

p116
Sunday Times read by 1 in 15 adulators, higher income groups, half are Conservatives, and one sixth are Liberal and Labur, readers are not interested in gambling sports, pronouncedly concerned with serious news. Very interested in feature articles and reviews. 

appendix 1! Advertisment appeal

notice taken 0 conscious interest appear to be low, practical impact stronger

national sample only 4% mentioned reading the ads and only 6% said they never read them at all. Only about 2/5th whole daily paper reading group couldn't specify none of the brands, makers or shops, most of the rest answered 3+. 

lowest recall is among readers of working class dailies. More than half the readers of the Times and nearly half the readers of the daily Mail can recla 4-6 different types of advertisement. Ability to recall is one tinkg, subconscious assimilation may be another. Feminine interest in rations and clothes = more attention than men to advertisement for biscuits ands skirts. Remember ads for product which they have a special interest in. 