The Medico Legal Journal 
pt One 
1978
vol.46 p 6 - 17 poisoning as a fine art
Roy Goulding

p10 
By animal testing sodium hypochlorite has a high acute oral toxicity. Yet we have never seen a serious case of poisonon from household bleach. Pn the other hand common salt liberally traded as an article of diet, was used by a mother successfully to poison her own child. while we have a series of dealths from this same material vouchsafed over zealously but in all good faith as no less tan an antidote to poisoning. 

p11
accidnetla piosonong of adults is nowadays unusual. 
mishaps with pesticie chemicals are of remarkabley low incidence. ... The more we study the psych attricubets o adult shwo are the sujbects of drug oD the more we beomce convinced that the act is nealry always deliberate. 

p 12
separate from these melancholy adults there is another section of the population that gives rise to anxiety over  - some might go so far as to add disporoprotionate anxiety - poisoning. Children... between 1 and 5 years, and principally between 1 and 3. Moved away from constant maternal care and dependence and as indepent beings explore the world aroudn them. Their predominant sensory facutly seems to reside with the mouth and the tongue, into which anything within reach is inserted. The y are amnivorous; anything and everything is grist to the oral mill - coal pencils detergent perfume bleach plant leaves dog medicines fly spray shoe polish and more ominously tablets and capsules for human medicatio that seem to adorn every hone in the kindom. 
Alarm and aimmdeicate appeal to dr or more freq the casualty dept.  Twenty thouseand small children are admmitted annually to the hospitals of England and Wales in this manner, understandably, as a precaution. Inly a tiny proportion of them show any symptoms or are poisoned in the true meaning of the word. This is becaus emost of requistes found in the homes are relativesly innocuous. Human medicines are wher ethe trouble lies. 
For those domestic areticles which it is clear form our hundreds of case records are relatively harmless, warnings and cautionary labelling and unnecessary tears should be avoided. Much mor ecare should be directed towards the tablets and capsules. Ecuccation here has largely filaed, so some method of childresistant packaging should become oblicatory 

