modern household science
EM Ling
1972, revised 1975
sim to apply principles used in modern Science teaching to the teaching of Household Science. Experiemnts. Suitable for use as complete text book, was well as manual for practical work. Not assume any previous sic knowledge on the part of the pubil. Borne in mind needs of Ho Ec teachers unfamiliar with modern lab techniques and of science teachers unfamiliar with the application of they subject to home ec. Coveres scientific aspect of domestic science syllabuses in Needlework, Clothing and Dressmaking O and A level. Useful as a bias for an Applied Science course for girls in upper forms of secondary schools. 


Chapter on stain removal and ry cleaning
table lists
carbon tetrachloride - do not inhale vapour, use in well ventilated room, do not smoke whilst using , as poison gas may be formed. 
acetone and nail varnis remover - acetone dissoves acetate fibre. Acetone is inflammable. 
meths - meths vaopu is inflammable, do not use near naked flame
petri - petrol vapour is inflammable, do not use near naked flame.
turps and white spirit - only use on fresh paint, will not work on hardened paints. 

experiments showing how to apply grease solvent to stain
with a glass rod place a little oil in the centre of each piece of fabric. 
rub octet using  arag into the stain and leave to dry
or make a ring of solvent around the stain and leave it. (avoid formation of ring caused by spreading o fthe stain by the solvent ofer a larger areas, more likely to occur if solvent applied directly to the stain. 

diluted household ammonia (more effective - evaporate , not leave a n excess of alkali) or sodium bicarbonate solution(will have to be waged out) are recommended to neutralised effete of acids on textiles. 

ink stains - strong solution of citric acid for several hours. If no citric acid available, use lemon juice, which contains citric acid and is therefore almost as effective. Some books recommend th ruse of oxalic acid (sometimes known as Salts of Lemon). This substance is very poisonous and it is not advisable to have it in the home. It is really no more effective than citric acid in the removal of ink stains) 

iron mould - p195
recommends citric acid solution (no amounts or strengths) 
p196 says to not use salts of lemon

p196 tea / coffee - glycerine, then left to soak in weak alkali - ammonia, borax or sodium bicarbonate. 

p200
further study
Stain Removal Proctor and Gamble Educational Service
