Newsam Library and Archives

Looking at photographs
	are there any instances of people using, applying chemicals or branded products
	any corporate publicity type events or material
	any of people cleaning ovens, toilets, stain removal?
	
	
BF/1/1/8
Dunraven School
pictures of 2 boys and a girl looking at first aid kit, which includes glass bottles of hydrogen peroxide (cork lid) Savlon

BF1/1/10
Admin scene - Bottle of Sqeezy in the background, near tin of poain?
marked 1970s
punk stuff in the foreground

The only publicity material seems to be posters about fish, Herring is the King of the Sea 
 (BF1/1/16 - living room kitchen set up)
 
 BF1/1/19
 Tin of Mammoth Foaming Cleanser
 Bottle of Quix
 both by sink - Kidbrooke school
 
 another polishing with duraglit polish 
 can see collection of bottles by sink in background
 
 
 Can see duraglit tin on table, mammoth and quix in the background
 
 Another sink, one along from the mammoth and qux
 this has jar of possibly soda?
 also other cleaners
 
 All the foodstuffs themselves are in jars - making them unbranded even if they were oritinally branded. (apart from prominent shot of lyles golden sytyp, bisto and a silvo in the bg. 
 
 BF1/1/23
 Parliament hill school
 some kind of kitchen science demonstration being done, can't read the bottles. but there are racks of test tubes and piles of watch glasses, cupboard full of graduated beakers. 
 
 
 1/1/29
 St Richard of Chichester School Home Ec Dec 1968
 
 laundry, water hardness
 Proctor and Gamble guide to stain removal
 looking at foam height in test tube
 
 West Kensington = 
 showing soda jar, knife cleaning etc
 
 
 
 
 London coutny Council
 
 1912 syllabus of instruction in domestic economy. LCC education OFfices Victoria Embankment WC
 R. Blair Education officer
 
 Laundrywork 
 (40 lessons) 
 lesson 2- Prep for washing, rules for washing wollens, Use of ammonia
...
 lesson 7 - The use of soda when washing very dirty of greasy articles
 cost
 ...
 LEsson 9 use of starch - cost, boilignwater startch
 
 rueles for washing colourdd cottons use of salt
 
 lesson 12 - practicaly illustratio - prespartion for washing day, removing reat coffeee ad fruit statins, revision of any previous work
 
 lesson 13 - use of bran salt and vinegar in laundry work. Pracitcl - washing starching and ironting cetonne and chinz
 
 lessons 15 - washing starching and ironing boilign water starch, use of borax and wax (in boiling water starch) cost
 
 lesson 17 - cold water starch, use of turpentine, cost - starching ironing and polishing collars, cuffs and fronts
 
 lesson 17a - care of infants, suitable clothign danger of flanneletter, how to render it less inflammable
 
 lesson 29 - use of disinfectants (practical illus - paraffin wahsing), precautions nec on the outbreak of infectious illness
 
 leson 30 - the use of salammoniac for cleaning wollen material\\
 
 lesson 34 - hard and sofet water, the value of softa water for clansing purposes
 
 35 - soap - its composition, good and bad soap, economy cost
 
 36 - alkalies used in laundry work. 
 
 
 
 Housewifery 40 lessons
 
 1) utentisls and materials, cost
 2) cleaning iron and steel, use of cleansing agent, economy and cost (bleackleading a grate, laying/lighting fire, cleaning slteel, fireirons, knives.
 3) cleaning brass, copper, tin, zinc, white or plated metal
 4) cleaning wood - water as a cleansing agent
 5) cleaning painted varnishe dan polished wood, various cleanisng agents, use ecnomy and cost (practical - making floor and furniture polishes) 
 6) cleaning stone various cleaning agents
 7) cleaning glass (cleaning windows, mirrors)
 8) cleaning china
 9) lino - choice cost care - sweeping ans wahing and polishing
 10) value of fresh air - eans of ventilation
 11) make the best of income, keeping accounts
 13) cleaning leather
 16) daily work
 17) weekly work
 25) care of infnats suitable lclothing danger of flanellette, how to render it less inflamable
 29) (practical - cleaning and polishing furnitre) 
 31) spring cleaning, plan of work
 32) spring cleaning special iems
 34) drainage - where drainpipes go, simple test for faulty drains (Cleaning the lav, flushing the sink with boiling water and soda)