notes from oral history search 'timothy whites'

Oral History of Community Pharmacy
Butler, Norman, 1908- (speaker, male; interviewee)
1995.07.20
Private chemists had a different idea: if it sold well you didn't have to bother about it, therefore Dettol went into the grocers: none of the chemists would show it. When Aspirin came in, they were told to stock it but not show it. 

 Worked in 2 pharmacies which were bombed out: one was Sutterton's at Warstock: was now of 6 shops - 5 went, chemists was on corner. Windows blown out and roof taken off. NB had to get tarpaulin. But damage team didn't want to do a shop-only house. 

Tape 2, side B: NB said we've got a lot of drugs here: wont be able to replace them. Must have tarpaulin - got them. Same with windows - got carpenter to build it up with old photographic plates. Took him 2 weeks to clear up the mess. Kept the dispensing going the whole time. Difficult, but he managed. Most were short term locums, 2-3 weeks. Sutterton was one of old chemists, who never shut for lunch - never had a proper meal at lunchtime - got ulcers. Got friendly with him: had sister to help him: they later moved to Somerset: went to visit them down there. Other bombed pharmacy was Williams in Small Health. They had 2 shops. Back windows blown in: didn't break front windows.

NB fell foul of boss: during war he'd got a lot of sodium nitrate on black market; could be used for potassium nitrate during the war
------------

Oral History of Community Pharmacy
Whalley, Ivor, 1936- (speaker, male; interviewee)
1995.10.16

eading about Chemistry - sulphonamides, story of not which healed Demonstration of dyestuffs at age 15 was turning point in his life. Holt's Chemists in Penny Street- coloured crystals in window 
 Small dispensary section, all patient medicines, plus drawer runs. Then photographic, surgical: then Boots Library. Other side farming goods, handbags. 
 
 ad quite a reputation for sorting things out. Wasn't just dispensing. Farmer had algae growing in tank in field. Calculated amount of bleach required, spent an hour or so, but unbelievable good will resulted. 
 
  Result of greed to sell non-pharmaceutical items. 
  
  
  ----------
  Oral History of Community Pharmacy
Spivack, Edith, 1911- (speaker, female; interviewee)
1995.08.31
  Remarks on difficulty of getting jobs in 1930s; on the formation of Timothy Whites & Taylors, and the feelings of staff of Squires shop on becoming part of a chain;
  Description of her work in fitting out her shop (mentions opening of first self-service chemist across the road from her own shop, on model of shops in United States)
   Remarks on beginning to type labels in 1950s; changing to metric measures; ceasing to use Latin for labelling; availability of generics; relationships with doctors; decline in public image of pharmacist as a professional; 
   
   --------------
   Oral History of Community Pharmacy
Kendall, Alan, 1920- (speaker, male; interviewee)
1995.12.05

    Used to supply hydrofluoric acid to local stone mason. Packed in gift percha bottles - about 1 pint at a time. 
    
    Encouraged to take off stopper and smell and inspect contents. Items needing packing up into 4oz, 8oz packages - Epsom Salts, Glaubers Salts - went into waxed paper, sulphur, milk of sulphur.
     Some of them wanted it mixed with menthol - charge for 1d worth of menthol. Tiny crystal of menthol ground up with snuff. 
     Apprentices acted as shop assistants - people brought bottles in to be filled - had to pay for bottle if not - often unsuitable so refused, especially for external use if not properly ribbed bottle. Cleaning bottles in sink in back - regardless of what had contained. Packing borax etc. 
     Abortion - drummed into them that on no account should they sell anything for that purpose. But sold essence of Penny Royal. No hesitation - unlikely to cause any problems. Sold slippery elm bark - no questions asked. VD - mercury ointment - used for pubic lice and crabs.
     Photographic - some paper - some films (Kodak & Ilford). Very few cameras - kept baby Brownie.
     
     -----------
   Oral History of Community Pharmacy
Dickman, Alan, 1915- (speaker, male; interviewee)
1995.10.13
    
      Father very friendly with Dr - used to go to caravan for holidays together. Prescriptions written on scraps of paper - 'C' meant club, 'ND' meant National Deposit Scheme. Father used to price them and send bill in, to Dr. Patients had to pay 3d for bottle. Or bring lemonade, ketchup bottle in. Not a lot of NHI because Dr ran own club and National Deposit Scheme: 
    Mother well known in town: if a girl had to see Mrs Dickman, meant that she was up the pole - abortion. 
    Father Pierre's Female Pills, quinine, slippery elm bark. People would come in asking for them for a friend (was involved in amateur dramatics). Was 3d range of female pills - people bought them hopefully. Mother sympathetic. Drew line at anything drastic. 
     
     Did own photographic work - on developing and printing: building took over from next door
     Selling cameras & films.
     Took chap on to go round farms. Not very good business. Didn't do much with animals.
     
     All night on sugar - able to make syrup. Lot of tinctures went out. Had ration every month of soaps, lipsticks, from wholesalers. Had shady fellows coming round with bottles of Brilliantine, which were awful muck, which we steered clear of. Father made a hell of a lot of cold cream, vanishing cream, hair cream. Liquid stockings, bath salts - sodi(um) sesquicarb. Get sacks full of this at Christmas. Every person in Berkhampsted had both salts for Christmas. 
     
  ---------
     
     Oral History of Community Pharmacy
Peretz, Michael, 1916- (speaker, male; interviewee)
1995.06.29

 Lot of it pretty menial -dunking the drug bottles, weighing out ounces of citric and bicarbonate of soda. 
  District man would come in every month or two - have a word with the apprentice - ask questions - what's in Seidlitz pdrs etc. Were expected to know where reference books were, and how to find out information wanted. 
  Wanted to know things outside retail pharmacy. Boots said 'why not take a holiday job in the factory? So he did: realised wasn't his cup of tea. S
  
  Prostitutes in London - used Boots sale of contraceptives. Jesse Boot was strictly Methodist - not involved in anything that might be considered unpleasant or nasty. Contraceptives not allowed to be sold in Boots branches - head office policy. In some of smaller branches - staff 7-8: all but 1-2 were women. But still had to have 2 lavatories. Considered improper for women to use lavatory that men went into. Strictly monitored by head office. But was ok to sell chemical contraceptives - fails to understand the logic. Rendells pessaries, Speton(?) etc., not as efficient as French letters. Prostitutes wanted chemical c/c in addition to French letters. Life in the raw. Abortion - yes, in Guernsey as well. Mothers would come in and ask to see the manager - pretty sure daughter was pregnant: was anything he could recommend? Word got around that you could buy from Boots quinine pills, and other remedies. As long as the didn't come in and say I want this for an abortion, it was perfectly legal to sell them: knew what. Slippery elm bark: came in long sticks - people came in and asked for ưlb. Had to crush it up into small pieces - they couldn't really say didn't want it. 
  
  Who did Boots see as main competitors - Timothy Whites were only other chain, apart from small ones. Individual pharmacist might own 3-4 shops. Boots had over 1,000 pharmacies, Timothy Whites had similar number. RPM a big issue then - lots of competition on toiletries side. With RPM on chemists counter, was arrogance by Boots that they didn't have much competition. T. Whites considered to be a pretty low class business. It sold household things. 
   Lord Trent had very strong belief post-war that Boots ought to be doing something for farmers: he believed farmers were getting a raw deal. So he set up the farms and gardens dept. MP had job of convincing farmers that Boots had something to offer then, in way of expertise in herbicides, fungicides, etc. Produced a quarterly magazine for farmers: articles about making farm more profitable and economical. 
   
   ------------
   Oral History of Community Pharmacy
Homan, Peter, 1938- (speaker, male; interviewee)
1995.06.30, 1995.07.05
Description of work as apprentice in South Norwood; hours and wages; formal training with Boots apprentice scheme learning pack; early dispensing experience, and other shop tasks - cleaning, photographic, character of customers (few private patients). 
Description of the dispensing work in the shop an products available; remarks on sale and abuse of chlorodyne, Boots refusal to sell contraceptives, sale of childcare products
Description of PH's experience of drug abusers and dispensing to addicts. Remarks on introduction of self-service sales, its impact on turnover, staffing and staff-customer relations

-----------
Oral History of Community Pharmacy
Homan, Christine, 1938-2008 (speaker, female; interviewee)
1995.11.24
Starts apprenticeship at age 16, with Boots, in 1954. Small High St. Working class, very easy, pleasant customers. Corner shop - single fronted. Mahogany counters, brass fittings - both sides - chemists & cosmetics. Dispensary - fairly large, back of shop, next to chemists counter: no visibility into shop. Staff, manager - experienced dispenser, apprentice: about 3 assistants, 1 is senior, part-time porter, cleaner. Cheap cosmetics - no agencies, a little Yardley, nothing expensive. Open 9am to 6pm. No rotas. Considered close to Piccadilly. No Sundays, closed Wed. pm. Duties of apprentice - morning starts with dusting - counter and dispensary until 10am. Surgery opens, get customers. CH serves - does very little in dispensary throughout 2 years. Possibly a little in the afternoons if it was quiet, would make up stock mixtures. Was basically a counter assistant: very few responsibilities - even for counter merchandise - were allowed to count stock and put in stock books
Very little time spent in dispensary. Feeling of all the apprentices - boys particularly felt they were just cheap porters. Girls mainly used as counter assistants. CH did make up stock mixtures for real - also a few prescriptions: checked by dispenser and then pharmacist. Lot of mixtures - about 50% made fresh, mist. aspirin, mist. sulphadionidine mist. mag trisil. Nearly also NHS dispensing - very busy. Mainly on medicines counter - her dusting area. Lot of Boots own brands - were a lot cheaper than proprietories. Came in asking for something for a cough. Trend towards asking for things by name - came in towards end of her 2 years. Gilbert Harding was advertising indigestion tablets - Macleans(?): started trend for asking for named brands (on TV: people came in and started asking for 'Gilbert Harding's Tablets'. Prior to that people not really aware of brand names). Tended to use one of stock mixtures, eg. ammon. Chlor et morph. etc., cheaper, rather than make up something special. People were very reluctant to spend money on medicines - not poor - all smoked. Low priority - would go for cheapest. Not aware of which were more profitable lines: just selling Boots brands. Never aware of profit margins, not suggested that sell larger bottle, etc. 
CH impressions of T. Whites - had a smaller range than Boots: we felt we were very upmarket to T. Whites: we did feel that our shops were so much better, so much brighter, so much cleaner, so much better stocked, better stock control - wouldn't vouch for it. T. Whites dealt more in hardware than did Boots, but otherwise typical pharmacies: most branches went in for cleaning materials, etc. In those days the shops stocked what the manager considered would sell, in consultation with TGM: if say you decided you wanted gardening, you would bring it forward, it would be agreed that you should try it, on at 6 m. or 3 m. basis: no directive from Head Office. So each Boots branch was different. London branches were typical. Soho, was market people - would keep large washing up liquids, starch, all suburban lines: in Regent St., wouldn't have anything like that. Same for T. Whites. Name changed gradually - logistics. Took weeks to clear out the old stock from theatrical shop in Leicester Sq., and to restock it: often to refit them. Didn't put Boots fascia over T. Whites fronts - waited until the shop was refitted. 
 Photographic on chemists counter: had dispensation to sell films on a Sunday, and late at night - being in a tourist attraction.
 
 ----------
.