National Archives Kew ReferedL FD23/1630

MRC headquarters
scientifc series
SEries symbol - S

Insecticides, Fumigants and Rodenticides
special subject: Possible effects of paraquat residues
general number: 414
special number: 26
openeing date: 30/09/1968
Poultry research centre


This correspondance relates to an enquiry (26 September 1968) made by Mrs Warren Davies, a chicken farmer who sold hatching eggs - Northfields Farm, Eastergate, Chichester. She ran the farm.

She is also "a consultant at the Society of Herbalist at 21 Bruton St. in London, as well as practising here - so I have plenty to keep me occupied. Three years ago had a serious outbreat of Gumboro disease in birds on range - 12 weeks old. Three weeks previously William [her son, who runs the cows] used Paraquat or diquat to kill grass under the electric fence which surrounded the arks. Birds had access to the sprayed grass. One morning the birds simply fell out of the arks, having apparently lost all sense of balance. Liver and kidney lesions were characteristic, also small muscle haemorrages. 

This spring I had several patients with exactly the same symptoms; I never thought of looking for haemorrages. Whilst in Pembrokeshire this year I was told the same symptoms were rife among potato-pickers, and that teh doctors there associeated it with something used on the potatoes. Paraquat is used for haulm destruction. 

I have heard of locak Gumboro outbreaks in which one age-group only in a rearing house were affected. Could a residue be cumulative? 

Hoping you will be interested, also can you give me any idea of what residue one can look for My local MOH Is more than interested - we do not know what to look for. Paraquat is also used to destroy bean and pea haulm among others. PAraquat as you undoubtedly know was the villain in the lung-transpant boy in Augst - here again the time lag is important. Could you possibly let me know what residue PAraquat leave? It is presumable transformed into some other substance."

Gumboro disease - 1st reported in US, commonly accepted that it is of viarl aetiology. The Central Veterinary LAb of MAg Hew Haw Weybridge have done quite a lot of work on it. 

Tim Carter describes this as an abstract of Mrs Davies letter, the letter itself is sadly not in this file, so unless I find Carter's original file, I cannot be sure what she has actually said. She is concerned about the effect of paraquat on the health of her chickens, but it does not appear that she is asking for any compensation. She just wants to know if it is a known effect, and what she could look for in a way of residue, and whether this might be metabolised into something that does have an effect. I think this is a very sensible letter, she does make reference to a story of paraquat poisoning in the news recently. She links it to anecdotal evidence of an issue in potato pickers - assume that the same symptoms she means are the loss of balance. 

She is fobbed off by Carter, her questions are not answered, and her questions are misinterpreted - unless the abstract does notmention them. EFfects on man of herbicidal residues in foodstuffs is not the issue, it is exposure of the pickers to residues on the haulm, of the exposure to chickens to the grass sprayed with the chemical.

What happens in the correspondance is that the writers latch on to her statement that she is a herbalist. Speak to Jules about this perhaps. I understand herbalism to generally look at the whole organism, in their environment, taking an intelligent approach. Nowhere does she say that her chickens are treated with active plant chemicals. 


What does Mrs Davies mean by they fell out of the cages? IS this loss of balance, or swollen joints (am assuming this is the bursa...). 

Message gets passed along  8th October by Chapman to Bates at Plant Pathology Lab, Harpenden, Dr Carter wants to know if there is a possiblity of residues being related to a disease in humans that resembles a poultry disesae. 
 
 Oct 14 reply, recieved 15 Oct
 states authority  --  I am concerned with pesticides on various Govt committees
 firm statements - highly charged copounds rapidly inactivated in soil and plant material
 
 unlikely to be absorbed by the gut.  - 14C labelled material has proved this. 
 
 No cases of poisoning among those exposed to paraquat during extensive use in agruculture. 
 
 Diquat does not cause lesions in anials, byt spry is irratings = nosebleeds
 
 no evidence of true cumulative effect, nor of carcinogenic effect. Chickens would not have been affected by any residues of paraqyat on vegetation and one could only imagine a toxic effect if they had drunk freely from a strong soln of paraqyat. 
 I do not know how many of your friends patients developed symptoms like Gumbaro, but I would think it much more likely that such symptoms had been cuased by the toxic plants used by herbalist rather than any residuces of pestices such as paraquat. Lists of plants used by herbalists include Seneio which casuses liver damage and liver cancer in animals, Vinca which hsa curious effects on cell mitosis and ahs been tried as a tmt for cancer. As yu probably know, many subtances that arrest tumours are also carcinogenic. Mandrake root is also on the list and this produces a very striking peripheral neuropathy. I would suggest therefore that any herbalist who suspects unusual poisoning among thier patients should scrutinse the plants they are prescribing before seeking for causes outside. Your sincerely, JM Barnes. 
 
 
 
 "I am not qute sure whether you would wish to pass on the later comments in Barnes' letter but it certainly looks as though at least some of the herbalists' own medicaments might not be above suspicion!"  Dr Gray
 
21 OCt Carter is peeved and  tells Barnes he asked for help because he was concerned that MRs Davies might approach her MP and instigate parliamentary questions if her enquiry was not taken seriously. Therefore, as he has not treated her seriously, Carter is is sending a copy of Barnes' letter to Mrs Davies - someone has pencilled in "that was pretty silly! espcially in views" 

22nd Oct
Parr from the MAFF replies to Chapman, replying to Carter's enquiry. 
paraquat is deactivated on contact with most soils dues to the absorption of the paraqyat ion by the clay molecules. Once this has occured it is no longer herbicidal, indeed, paraquat acts by absorption by leaves adn not roots. One would expect soil in the chichcester area to contain some clay. 

The amt of paraquat remainin g on veg after it has been killed is v small or undetectable. PAraqyat is subject to rapid photochemical decomposition. 
Dr Carter should know the paper by Dunachie and Fletcher (Nature 1967 - 215 (5108) 1406-7 calling for interpretation , answered to some extent by letter from K ? Fletcher

We do not think that paraquat residues on grass 21 days after tmt would harm poulty. We have heard nothign that supports the allegation about the pembrokeshire potatoe pickers. 

Again, Mrs Davies has been misinterpreted I think - she talks about a lag between exposure and effects - the chickens were exposed then three weeks after an effect was seen. That paraquat residues are not harmful afer 21 days in the element is irrelevant. 

Cannot believe they're actually sticking with the line that herbalists use toxins. 


Do not know why the newspaper clipping is in this file. 


30 Oct 1968

Dr Carter - ARC Poultry Research centre - approached by old business acquaintance for advice - sent enquiry to Dr Gray
Dr Gray - secretary of MRC  - away so passed on to others by his secretary miss potts, 
Dr Chapman - Medical Research Council - seems to do most of the reaching out
Dr Barnes - MRC, Tox Research Unit - was asked specifically for "clinical views" - he drew attention to herbalists - scruitnise their own plants, also that many of the notifications of exposure are very trivial.
MR Bates - Plant Pathology 
Mr Parr - MAFF - paraquat deactivated by clays, photochemical decomposition - no /undetectable residue




Ministry of Agriculture - SAfety Inspectorate - re. potato pickers in Pembrokeshire

Secretariat of the Scientific Sub-Committee on Safety Arrangements for the use of Toxic Chemicals in Agriculture - they have heard nothing which supports the allegation about the potato pickers.













