This paper examines the history of the weedkiller paraquat which was first presented to the agricultural industry in1962, then in a different formulation to the domestic gardener in 1965. Using adverts, product packaging, newspaper and magazine articles in addition to Hansard, I want to show the varied ways that users were imagined, or constructed, and how unintended uses changed how the chemical was packaged, presented and discussed over the following twenty four years after its introduction. There are questions about how far government can intervene through legislation and enforcement, what responsibility manufacturers should and do take for investigating and communicating hazards associated with their products, as well as what responsibility individuals should and do take for dealing with herbicides safely and appropriately.

try 135 words / min
2700 words approx for 20 min
read it out loud and time it

Gardeners who want to clear weeds from their paths, driveways, lawns and borders can use a variety of weedkilling chemicals, as well as mechanical methods such as pulling out by hand, hoeing, using specialist weeding tools or even a flame thrower. Weeding has typically been characterised as time consuming, dull, back breaking so there has been a market for mechanical and chemical aids to this garden care task. For effective clearing of paths and clearing areas before planting up with aesthetically pleasing displays or productive vegetables and fruit, sodium chlorate, or chlorate of soda as it is also known, had been embraced by home gardeners and allotmenteers. This chemical came onto the domestic market in 1935, when the National Allotment Society arranged for the sodium chlorate to be packaged in quantities appropriate for domestic use and made it available through their national in name but not so much in practice Horicultural Supplies seed and equipment sales business. Previously, sodium chlorate had to be bought directly from importers or manufacturers in large, industrial sized quantities and this was too expensive and too large a quantity even for an allotment association clubbing together. 

Sodium chlorate took the form of crystals, like salt, which were dissolved in water before being sprayed or applied with a watering can onto the area afflicted by weeds. There was a known problem with this chemical - when the solution soaked into gloves or other textiles, then dried, the friction from by wearing the sodium chlorate impregnated garment caused the chemical to ignite or explode. This effect was initially described by the National Allotment Society as an inflammable gas given off as the garment dried, but after doing some more research, gave their readers a comprehensive description of the action of friction. The explosive nature of sodium chlorate provided entertainment for anyone pyrotechnically inclined, with sodium chlorate sometimes being substituted for potassium chlorate in homemade bangers. Other than autumnal calls for controls on sales to children, the chemical remained on unrestricted sale until 2004 [CHECK DATE]. When its withdrawal from the market was announced, devotees stockpiled the chemical and lamented the loss of such an effective weedkiller. 
[is this at all related to anti terrorism efforts?]

Sodium chlorate is very effective, but it also remains effective for several months. For gardeners who want to be able to use the area soon after ridding it of weeds, a different product is needed. 

A subsidiary of Imperial Chemical Industries, Plant Protection Limited who based in Yalding, developed a product called Weedol specially for home gardeners. It killed plants through contact with the leaves, and was deactivated by the clays present in soil. The active ingredient in Weedol is paraquat, which ICI have marketed to home users since 1965. Paraquat was developed from 1953 by researchers at ICI initially not just as a herbicide, but a revolutionary aid to farming, boosting the nation's total area of productive land, and when exported overseas set to gaurantee riches to the UK's chemical industry. 

Paraquat's  properties of being rapidly inactivated by contact with soil and it's lack of selectivity (it killed all green broadleaved plants exposed to sunlight) had initially made it an unappealing choice for a new weedkiller. However, Bill Boon, a biochemist with ICI, saw an entirely new system of arable farming, one that didn't have to involve ploughing so would retain moisture and avoid soil erosion. Their "chemical plough" was introduced to the agricultural market in 1962, under the brand name Grammoxone, the concentration of active ingredient paraquat was 20%. It arrived with farmers as a brown liquid and among the warnings about avoiding contact with skin and eyes, there were instructions that, other than filling spray application equipment, it should not be decanted from the original containers. 

Why did ICI not just sell sell the concentrated version to home gardeners instead of going to the trouble and expense of a completely new product? At 5% active ingredient, Weedol is far less concentrated than grammoxone, and it also comes as granules to be mixed up rather than a liquid to be diluted. These are both safety measures that were necessary for ICI's paraquat product to be sold to home gardeners, avoiding some of the skin problems that agricultural users experienced when they were exposed to the chemical from leaking application equipment.  

I looked at the Ministry  of Agriculture, Fisheries and Farming files on Weedol and Paraquat which are held at the National Archives. These contained the correspondance between individuals at Plant Protection, MAFF and other organisations, generated in the process of showing the products efficacy and safety ,needed to get clearance to market the product to domestic consumers.

I mentioned earlier the strict proviso not to decant agricultural strength paraquat herbicide into other containers. Perhaps inevitably, it was decanted into drinks bottles by people impressed by the effectiveness of the chemcial. These familiarly shaped bottles found their way into bags, glove compartments, sheds, kitchens and even fridges where they were mistaken for dark drinks: cola, ribena, stout and swigged by curious or thirsty children, teens and adults, with very serious and sad consequences for there was no known antidote to paraquat poisoning. Plants required sunlight to act on the chemical before causing death, but internal human tissues ulcerated after contact with the herbicide and even if it was spat out, the damage was done because  paraquat could quickly be absorbed and enter the bloodstream. The chemical has a peculiar effect on lung tissue in particular, causing the cell proliferation in the lungs which effectively solidify. This was a horrifyingly certain and slow death, despite doctors' best efforts to deactivate or dilute the chemical in the bloodstream. Newspaper reports of these accidental poisonings invariably conveyed the lack of effective treatment available, and the Daily Mail tabliod newspaper generally used the phrase "no known antidote".  In the Times, Daily Mail and Guardian the chemical name, paraquat, rather than the brandname grammoxone, was held accountable. Each of these accidental poisonings could be attributed to the non-domestic herbicide being taken, some have said stolen, then stored and labelled inappropriately. Even where newspapers did not, perhaps out of tact, report on the origin of the herbicide before it got into the home, readers who followed the reports of paraquat poisonings would have known that this chemical generally wasn't available to all and sundry. 

Weedol was developed to avoid some of these problems. It was sold as packets of granules to be dissolved directly in a watering can (which when sent out with Plant Protection staff for testing at home raised questions about the size of commonly owned watering cans, and thus what could reasonably be expected to give reliable results) in order that the full amount would be used up and there would be no storing of left overs in bottles. Even when Weedol was on the market, there continued to be accidental poisonings with Grammoxone, described by MAFF as "people who wanted to avoid the expense of buying Weedol". 

Could I do a graph of the accidental and murderous poison reportings? 

One of the consequences of the extensive reporting of accidental poisonings was increased awareness of the fatal effects of the herbicide on humans. This manifested in a number of outcomes. People became aware of *why* they shouldn't decant the industrial strength herbicide into unlabelled bottles, and what the consequences could be of asking a friend for a bit of the amazing weedkiller they use at work. Although the labelling had stressed not to put it into soft drinks bottles, there is limited space on a label. A similar problem had been encountered with instructions to wash the chemical off if it splashed on the skin. Users might have read or been told this but having not been given a consequence or reason they did not wash it off, resulting in chemical burns and irritation. 

Non-accidental poisonings also started to occur and be reported on, sometimes in great detail when a murder was associated with a juicy love triangle. In one of these cases, a woman who was found guilty of poisoning her husband with grammoxone (always reported as paraquat) even said that she had got the idea from a story in the newspaper. On this subject, the newspapers remained quiet, despite the interesting question of their responsibility for copy-cat behaviour triggering. 

Despite most of these deaths being connected to the concentrated, non domestic product, Weedol got brought into view because it contained such a notorious chemical. Weedol featured in numerous para-suicides; the medical reporting of these uses of the domestic chemical do not state whether the user chose this weaker form as a signal of distress rather than wanting to end their lives, or because they were unaware that the paraquat reported on in most news stories was actually a different, more potent form. Having said that, those who took enough of the granules or made up solution then took steps not to be found were successful. 

The Daily Mail in particular took up the cause of paraquat poisonings, especially focusing on the risk to children, running their own investigations into how easy it was to obtain the concentrated form where standards of retail were lax - documentation wasn't checked, the purchaser unknown to the seller, verbal warnings or advice were not given and signing of poison registers haphazard. A number of the participants in the parliamentary debates involving paraquat had experience of farming themselves, and were aware of the benefits of paraquat when used correctly as well as the tragic outcomes when it was not used as intended. Whether through mis-speaking, misunderstanding or absence of facts, Hansard records some continuing confusion about the appearance, availability and differences between agricultural and domestic paraquat preparations, so where personal experiences could be called upon they lent credibility and force to the arguments presented by those involved [REF]. Members of the House of Lords even wanted to experience some of the points debated personally, by going into shops to buy it and examining the wording on the packaging to decide for themselves about the language used and the legibility of the label. 

The Daily Mail newspaper's active role in educating readers about the dangers of paraquat can also be seen in the MAFF files, in the form of requests for information from their reporters, or MAFF civil servants (?) reaction to articles from the Daily Mail where they had reported speaking to company representatives, apparently saying things that been unknown to individuals at MAFF, or anticipating what journalists would be asking for. 

How were the users imagined or portrayed, and how did it change over time?

The text ... 

How does the Daily Mail envisage them? Those who bring the potent chemical home and accidentally poison a  family member are treated quite gently, there is no blame or demonisation from the paper. As poisonings of this type accumulated, a judge was reported as frustratedly saying "when will these people learn?", but the reporters at the paper did not expand or moralise on the subject of who "these people" were.

Who were these people? 
MAFF described them as trying to avoid the expense of buying Weedol, [how expensive was weedol? buying grammoxone was pretty expensive - the wife who poisoned her husband lied to her lover that it was too expensive so she didn't get it] so despite all the publicity about accidental poisonings from re-used drinks bottles. From the circumstances reported, they were quite young, they worked in manual jobs or were in social circles with people who did and could therefore obtain the high concentration paraquat chemical. One of the accidents occured in static caravan park. 

This is not the user of paraquat herbicide the advertisements for Weedol show, which is a middle aged male, he has a little belly, this is his garden, he's using it among flowers and shrubs - not to clear expanses of weeds, and he's at leisure - he's wearing a casual jumper, smoking a pipe. Some adverts contrast this to weeding without Weedol, though the non-user here is still male, casually dressed and weeding among plants in his own garden, he is unable to enjoy smoking a pipe at the same time- he doesnt' have a hand free to do this, his leisure time is made less leisurely by the potential for bodily discomfort "back breaking" labour. 

Murders
In the cases reported on in newspapers, the paraquat was administered by a spouse in the domestic environment, in sherry, in cups of tea, in dinner. These were adulterous, jealous people, both men and women doing the poisoning, in turbulent or unconventional relationships which were described in salacious detail in the newspaper.  

I experienced an odd distortion of my interpretation of adverts, having been reading about paraquat murders and love triangles when I saw this advert, from 1978 "Stop Weeds going to bed with your flowers". I looked at this as flowers being feminine, and the male gardener applying weedol is fending off advances of masculine weeds. The feminine flowers are passive and helpless, they are not inviting the weeds but they aren't able to stop them without their strong male protector with his Weedol solution. In actual fact, there hadn't been a love triangle reported in the papers for a couple of years, so this might really be just about the flower bed being shared by weeds and nothing more. I haven't found any material yet about this advertising campaign, but they may well have been aware of the various scandalous cases that paraquat in one form or another had been involved in. 

Another version of poisoning was the use of paraquat as a sabotage in Edinburgh branches of the supermarket Safeway in 1987. Somebody could by chance bring a contaminated product home into their domestic environment and unwittingly be poisoned by a stranger. This threat damaged Safeway through both fear of paraquat poisoning resulting in a decline in custom [?], but also their decision to operate under a media blackout in order to avoid giving the sabateur the attention he craved, therefore not informing their customers of the risk they were taking.  

changes to formulation
In order to try to reduce the possibility of stolen, decanted strong herbicide being mistaken for harmless drinks, a stenching agent was added (DATE). This was a move called for by the Daily Mail and echoed in the Houses of Parliament. It was a relatively simple operation for ICI so they were able to demonstrate taking action fairly fast. ICI were reported to be spending xxxxx each year on "finding an antidote" although they maintained their stance all the way that when the precautions and instructions on the product packet were followed, users would be safe.



