Phillip Ball

chemistry - seems not to be asking any questions about the world at all, primarily a synthetic science a science bound up with making things. 

me:
am not sure how this statement can work - wheat is the point of making things that people don't want, in order to find out what is wanted,  or to make useful/ profitablety things, there must be questions asked about the world. They might not be the "nature of existence or what does it mean to be human" questions, but they are the practical side of these questions. 

this was set up so that Ball can say that older science was a discovery science - understanding what made up the world

again, I think that it still is a discovery science, as you can't synthesise the things that people want if you don't discover new ways of doing it, or more deeply understanding/ characterising the problem. He says that the big questions have been answered.


I wonder if anyone has compared DeLillo's White Noise (1984) to The Incredible Shrinking Woman? 
Both US. both chemicals and consumer society. 


Most interesting reference that kept cropping up was
Heise UL 2002 *Toxins drugs and global systems: risk and narrative in the contemporary novel* American Literature, 74, no 4



David Knight

Popularizing Chemistry: hands on and Hands off

p125
readers of newspapers are defined as a group - interested but unsophisticated
newspapers avoid long words an long sentences, who pick up the personal rather than the abstract
taxpayers
consumers who both pay for chemistry and are essential for it future

p131
poisons,like explosions, have also always drawn audiences, who might not have gone to her August Hofmann talk about molecular structures, even though he had croquet balls and rods as his visual aids. 

p132
unpopularity befell all sciences, but chemistry - language looks like algebra, jaw cracking long names, hard jargon to break into and proficiency in maths has become more important than manual dexterity. 
1914-1918 market as the chemists war - poison gas struck imagination as horrifying manifestation of the science. Einstein and his contemporaries displaced chemistry from the elite and fundamental position. Chemistry had essential role to play in thew teams and groups, which came to replace the lone genius/hero like Frarday. Chemistry seemed everyone's essential service-science - not glamourous. 
chemistry acquired a reputation for polluting and pharmaceutical industry for profiteering. 


