Photography for boys and girls
Junior teach yourself

preface p7 need not be a difficult or expensive
almost everyone will be wiling to assist you - as an example two great British firms Ilford Ltd and Johnsons of Hendon, makers of chems specially proceed for photography have helped me in the preparation of this book

p15
photography need not be expensive if you learn how to do your own developing and printing properly. It is both expensive ad unintelligent to tae photographs and then hand them over to someone see to d and p because you are too lazy or ignorant to do it yourself. But it would also be expensive to work carelessly or without finding out how the material should be used as so much would be wasted. 

[althouhg the section is called history and some warnings, these warnings only take the form of being careful and not wasting materials which would mean being expensive]

clean and tidy
spoilt results
p16 you can be sure the man who made the material will know  how to use it and if you do not follow his instructions you will probably spoil the material. It will then be your fault that you have wasted the materials and the money that you paid for them. 

p24 measures which you can buy form the chemist
p25 one pound jam jar, stick piece of gummed tape on the side and starting at the bottom mark of centimetres  - these will indicate liquid ounces.
thermometer 0 must buy, not easily made, not clinical thermos, as you will almost certainly spoil it and it doesn't record changes fast enough. Not use a wooden or metal bath thermometer either.

p26 can use household scales with permission, and use piece of paper in the bottom to prevent contact with chemicals. This also makes it easier to move chems. wipe down afterwards

on discussing how to tell which side of the paper is which - don't touch it, will leave fingerprints. p27 bite the paper right on the corner v gently - the side which just sticks to your teeth is the one with emulsion coating on it.

p62 end of developing time, pour out developer. If no other films *throw away the used developer*. this may seem extravagant but will soon go bad and you will almost certainly spoil your next film. Small quantities of dev cost much less than a spoiled film.
p63
pour the hypo back into its jar or bottle
p64
developing solution - use concentrated liquid developer such as Johnsons Azol according to the directions in the instruction leaflet, or from a a packet of chems such as a Johnsons M-Q Pactum. 
either use concentrated liquid form of fixing solution such as Jonsons Fix-Sol, or from the dry chems sold in a tin as Acid hypo Fixing. 

collect lists and catalogues - obtained from photographic dealer or chemist. Write to makers enclose return postage
Home photography David Charles (Johnsons of Hendon)
Ilford book of winter photog (and other ilford pubs)

[No images or illustrations of girls or boys actually developing - only of the equipment and chemicals needed]
in the section on taking/composing photographs there were pictures of girls operating the camera and as the subjects. Assume these are the girls that he dedicates the book to - Poj, celia and judy

