Picture  Post

Weedkiller
2 results
ICI advert about hormone weedkillers being able to distinguish between wheat and weeds

Doctor in the dock
01.04.57
Dr Bodkin Adams, Old Baily
longest ever murder charge trials. compared to other long trials, including the prosecution of a Hereford solicitor who was alleged to have fed weedkiller to his wife. Sir Norman Birket QC successfullly define Mrs Pace on a charge of poisoning her husband by putting sheep dip in the butter. Conflict of expert testimony as in the Adams trial is not v common. 

Carbon Tetrachloride - no resutls

Thawpit - thawpit product
Thorpes wash ion up powder
No coupons 9d pkt
Nov 02.1946 p 30, also Dec 14, 1946 p4

various cartoon people waiting for someone, shouting to let the washing up powder do the work. (people waiting around the table, children waiting to go out, father and son waiting on a tandem plus side car Jan 18 1947, p38, Come on Dad - leave the washing up to Thorpes shouts a bride in a wedding dress 
Come on - leave the washing up to Thorpes

Benzene - 
2 results - one correction from school boy about benzine and benzene
ICI advert about fly killer

Bicarbonate
indigestion  i i 
leavening i iiii
health bath i 

washing soda
sylvan flakes - no soda, purity, wear out delicate fabrics, feel the effect of harsh soaps on hands, man ace to woollens silks and linen. easy on the hands if you value your hands you simply must use sylvan flakes for your washing. Sylvan Flakes contain absolutely no soda. (Thoamns Hedley and co 09.03.40 p9) 

other is 2 page spread on the methods developed by ICI/ Plant Protection about making silage. 

chemistry set - 1 result
feature article - 29.03.47  p27
A orphan finds a family Hilde Marchant
chemistry set is a christmas give - story is of how a foster child was adopted and treated like the other children.. 

dark room - 50 results
article on photographic advances 'Finally photography like all other human activities is busily trying to trench the foolproof stage of its evolution. MFcrs will not be happy until they have completely outwitted the human brain's capacity for making mistakes. 20 years ago every amateur was in terror of over or underexposing his picture; to day negatives and printing paper are so tolerant of mistakes that a good picture can be squeezed out of almost any badly exposed negative' 

adverts for blackout curtains that aren't gloomy

mostly for things that are used in dark rooms

photographic chemicals - 0 results
stain removal - ditto

oxalic acid 1 result 

An adventure in furnishing - 
23.03.46 p24
floor - dark brown parquet, thick with grime. We wanted it light The dirt came off with a sting solution of caustic soda and oxalic acid bleached it light - altogether third shillings. 
article about making a charming and cheap home

caustic soda - 3 results
the Jeallots hill article seen already, the furnishing article about the floor, and and ICI advert
mainly about the tunnel / pipeline from Wilton to Billingham (01.05.54)

oven cleaner
1 result
but this is for the oven itself - cleaner = less work for the busy housewife (Cannon Ga 09.01.54 p6)

ammonia
lots more articles, also adverts for Scrubbs

Picture post has feature Science To-day
05.11.38 p67
round up of various things. the ammonia is n't interesting but the section on where insecticides come from is. 
Japanese pyrethrum, but in Kenya a better form can be grown and the birtsih colony is preparing to challenge the Japanese mono in the fly swatting plant. In America Devils Shoestrings are rich in rotenone. Trouble is that cheap labour is necessity to make plant gathering pay and you cannot induce the more or less free citizens of a dmeocray to gather Devils shoestrings as cheaply as the totalitarian slave os fJapan or the exploited native labor of Arica can gather pyrethrum. 


Norill carpet cleaner (made by Scrubbs) 
men feature in recommending it both to men (in the policeman advert) and to women (in the chimney sweep ad The sweep comes clean - 08.04.39 p70) 
absolutely simple to use, harles, non inflammable. 

british commercial gas association 0 how much do you know about housekeeping? quiz style advert for gas. 1939

cloudy ammonia for baths - and gnat bites 1939

for the house - spoonful of scrubs in every pail of water makes any type of cleaning more effective and thus less frequently necessary

wartime advertising
April 1940
There is no increase *yet* on the prewar prices for Scurbbs Cloudy Ammonia. There is no shortage *yet* of Scrubbs in the shop where you usually buy it. But there *is* a greatly increased demand for Scrubbs because wartime has place an extra emphasis son its many uses
You need scrubs every day for something about the house. You will continually need it in the uncertain months ahead. Be wise. Buy a stock now while supplies are plentiful and while prices are still 6d and 1/4. 
Some of Scrubbs many uses
if you have charge of evacuee children...
cleaning
feet
always a bottle in the bathroom and another in the kitchen. 
springcleaning

evacuees feature in other scrubs adverts - creating more work - finger makes, stains, smear sand spots. 
 
 Scrubbs Silver and Plate Cleaner
 26.04.47 p5
 A dazzling display
 peculiar advert of a circus act balancing drinks set on his head, wheeling a woman in a wheelbarrow along a tightrope, as she holds a parasol out to each side. 
 Bright silver and plater are a constant joy to the house profud wife. She should not be without scrubs lifer and plater cleaner. Unequalled for cleaning, not only silver and plate but also fold and jewellery . Simple to use 0 no hard work and its non-abrasive. There's a good name behind it. Made by the makers of scrubs cloudy ammonia famous for 80 year. s
 
 Furniture cream
 polished performance
14.06.47
positively there is nothing to rival the performance of scurbb's furniture cream. It not only polishes your furniture it cleans and dresses it as well. 
picture of ice skater pirouetting and apparently swirling "scrubbs" in the ice. 

Scrubbs window cleaner
12.07.47
It's crystal clear
that the proper way to get windows really clean is to use 
which quickly removes all smears, fly marks and stains. The same applies to mirrors, dressing table tops, windscreens and all types of glassware. Easy to use - no hard work 1/6

space travel / different planetary atmospheres. 

Scrubbs carpet cleaner 03.10.53 p34
no mention of Norill
good carpet is an investment for life unless grit and grime and grease get at it. beating an vacuuming shift the surface dirt leaving ingrained abrasive grit behind to grind away at the pile ad wear holes in the wave. Reguarl shampooing is the real answer! and for the quickest easiest most thorough shampoo the name is Scrubb's (front rank name in cleaning for just over 100 years)!

paraquat 0
herbicide 0
weeding =23

cut by a half buried tin while weeding - dettol advert

lord Privy Sea: Clement R Attlee
pictures - in his garden at home (smoking a pipe and holding a kitten with children) but text reads fewer and fewer today grow that leisure hours which he can spend in his Stanmore garden weeding his flower beds and playing with his children. 

article on hydroponic agriculture - no weeding

most instances are weeding out - either military, education, employment or breeding

Queen Salote and her People
 Queen of Tonga weeding her garden - 26.12.53 p7 act of private domesticity, a change from the ceremony and publicity
 
 film stars weeding
  1954 Capstan fag advert - Vernoica has other interest besides acting
  
  alfred cole 
  gardener from buckingham palace advises that weeding and hoeing his worth the effort 1954
  1954 your garden this week
  herbaceous oborder will need a lot of weeding, the more often you hoe between all growing crops, the more you destry hong weeds before the y have the chance to rob the crops of food and moisture. In dry weather this is particularly important. 


 
