http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/v013/13.2.knudsen.html 

Browse > Social Sciences > Business and Society > Advertising & Society Review > Volume 13, Issue 2, 2012
Man's last stand! Polysemy and dialogue in advertising reception
Gry Høngsmark Knudsen (bio)
Abstract
This paper examines the reception to an ad on YouTube, showing how users negotiate and challenge an ad's meaning in dialogue with other users, texts, and the persuasive intent of the ad. The ads, user comments, and video responses are analyzed through a combined netnography and discourse analysis. The analysis shows how polysemy is an aspect of the reading process and not an outcome of a more or less loyal acceptance of ad meaning. Thus, this study gives evidence that supports rhetorically oriented advertising theories.

Introduction
Polysemy in advertising is generally explained as disparate readings of the same text. For example, Mick and Buhl showed in 1992 that the interpretation of ad's meaning depended on the consumer's own life "themes" and projects.i The importance of personal context to the reading of an ad also suggests that polysemy can lead to a situation in which readers form two mutually exclusive interpretations of the same ad.ii The idea that readers could reach mutually exclusive interpretations of an ad originated in Stuart Hall's famous essay, "Encoding/ decoding," in which he describes three reading positions that lead to three exclusive meanings.iii Hall's theory was at the time a challenge to the dominant structural paradigms in media and advertising studies because he showed the possibility of resisting mediated messages. Thus, Hall challenged both information-processing theoryiv and Marxistv (as well as some feminist) theoriesvi of advertising because, Hall argues, consumers can choose to read "against" the "preferred" meaning of the ad.
Thus far, polysemy in advertising research is about the mutually exclusive readings of meaning from the same more or less open text.vii Reception research, however, has shown that consumers are sophisticated readersviii and aware of persuasive trickery,ix and therefore consumers can read texts simultaneously as critical readers and consumers. Consumers' critical readings have, however, been questioned when they have been elicited in artificial research situations, where reading time and the research context create possibilities and expectations of critical readings, whereas everyday situations provide completely different conditions for ad interpretations.x Hitherto, receptions of ad meaning have been invisible in the sense that consumer readings, in general, are not accessible except for research projects and other special circumstances. On social media, however, consumer interpretations are visible and public, and, consequently, it is possible to get insights to their polysemic and dialogic nature.
In this article, I present the specific case of how consumers negotiate ad meaning on YouTube relative to a Dodge 2010 Super Bowl ad, Man's last stand. As a source for a study on ad meaning, YouTube is exemplary because it allows both consumers and companies to upload, to circulate, and to comment on ads. Thus, on YouTube, the consumer voices can engage in dialogue with the commercial discourse as well as with other users. Dodge's ad created a heated debate on masculinity in modern Western society, and as such it provides an interesting case to investigate; it provides an example of consumers engaging in oppositional reading strategies and polysemic interpretations.
Dodge's ad shows us a montage of four males among which is the YouTube celebrity Noah. While the image of the men changes, Michael C. Hall'sxi voice tells the story of how today's men suffer all kinds of injustices during their adult life. From walking the dog early in the morning, to being bored in their work life, to carrying around their girlfriend's lip balm, these men endure all kinds of trivialities. But as the roar of an engine breaks the monotony of the voiceover and brass band music accentuates the change of pace, the ad contends, they do so because the justification is to drive the car they want to drive—the Dodge Charger.
On YouTube, the video has a life of its own; it is surrounded by intense debate as well as numerous video responses. As of August 22, 2011: it had been viewed 1,483,312 times; a total of 3,463 viewers have voted on its "likeability"; and it has garnered 2,547 comments.xii In relation to overall YouTube viewings and comments, these numbers are not significant. The impact of Man's last stand, however, is apparent in the many unsolicited and unofficial uploads of Man's last stand on YouTube and of the numerous video remakes, responses, and spoofs. The significance of the ad is the interactional activity it generates on YouTube. The comments and video responses show how consumers engage in various reading strategies and how they negotiate the meaning of the commercial in a collective space.
Dialogue and marketplace meta-cognition
In this article, I suggest combining a sociological approach with reception theoryxiii to develop a theoretical framework to account for the interrelationship between critical, individual, and collective readings. I combine literary reception theory with sociologically based discourse analysis to show the dynamic nature of advertising reception on social media. In the context of user participation as it applies to ads on YouTube, the contribution of this paper to advertising and social media studies is primarily theoretical because I explore the implications of a dialogic perspective to current understandings of advertising communication; that is, this analysis accounts for seemingly disparate readings and shared understandings. If consumers, as SLAB (Saussure, Lacan, Althusser, Barthes)xiv inspired advertising theory contends, are manipulated and socialized into a capitalist realismxv of consumerism,xvi distorted body images,xvii and gender stereotypes,xviii then, how can the YouTube users recognize and share the interpretation of the ideological meaning presented by the ad, yet disagree on the significance of that ideological message?
I propose that the user negotiations about meaning on YouTube illuminate the dialogic and dynamic nature of meaning production. Theoretically, I build on a rhetorical understanding of reading and interpretation,xix which implies that, by sharing the same culture, users have learned the same coding logicsxx and therefore basically read the same message about modern masculinity. Their personal context, however, influences, for example, how they value or accept the message.xxi A dialogic perspective explains the interactional aspect—a consumer can read the text from a culturally coded perspective and a personally coded perspective as well as sharing those readings with other consumers in a discursive space. This dialogic understanding of advertising communication challenges a structural understanding of communication because it shows how users within a discursive space can both read and understand the ideological meaning of the ad, yet disagree with its significance. This understanding, therefore, gives evidence to the reflexive reading strategies of consumers. Consequently, this paper concludes that polysemy is not necessarily about mutually exclusive readings; rather, polysemy also occurs in the act of reading itself as the reader recognizes the various possible values of the same message.
In the following narrative, I introduce theoretical perspectives about masculinity and advertising to provide the discursive context for the debate on YouTube. Then follows a discourse analysis of Man's last stand and its discursive context, Woman's last stand and Getaway Car, as well as the consumer negotiation of the discourse. Based on the analysis, I develop and discuss a theoretical conceptualization of dialogue and the production of polysemic meaning. Finally, I describe the implications of a dialogic perspective for advertising theory and for the concept of marketplace meta-cognition.
Masculinity and advertising
The sociological literature on masculinity and the active fashioning of identity generally recognizes that mediated images are part of the discourse that enable and disable various gendered expressions.xxii According to this literature, in some cases advertising hinders the development of gender change or gender equality.xxiii However, as I show in the analysis, reception of advertising is not passive or submissive; rather, the messages in advertising are critically examined and digested in various ways. The context of reception facilitates certain readings, and in the case of Man's last stand, the surrounding gender debate becomes part of the dialogue as consumers respond to the ad. Usually, when talking about how advertising influences identity formation, the emphases are on stereotypingxxiv and objectification by the malexxv or female gaze.xxvi A smaller fraction of research, however, points to the ways advertising is used in a positive manner to form a desired identity, even though the available images of men are relatively limited. In their article from 2004, Holt and Thompson describe how men in commercials are primarily described in three ways: the breadwinner, the rebel, and the Man-of-Action Hero.xxvii Linda Tuncay Zayer has expanded on the typology of ideal masculinity.xxviii The types developed, however, are within the spectrum between rebel and breadwinner (e.g., the family man and the adventurer). Holt and Thompson describe how men use mediated images to resolve the conflict between the masculine ideals of the breadwinner and the rebel. Both Tuncay Zayer and Holt and Thompson suggest that ads provide images for men both for identification and to help resolve identity issues.
Modern masculinities
When looking at Man's last stand, it seems as if the producers may have read Tuncay Zayer's typology of masculinities in advertisingxxix and Holt and Thompsons' Man-of-Action Heroes.xxx The ad shows four different men, a differentiation that could be considered possible entry nodes for identification by male viewers depending on the viewer's understanding of his own masculinity.xxxi Thus, the ad is constructed in a way that makes it possible for ordinary men to recognize themselves and, by the end of the commercial, to perceive an ideal form of masculinity. As the voiceover of the ad lists the triviality of men's lives in modern Western society, the images of the various men changes, until finally, a man with an upright position stares straight into the camera and the voiceover announces that the way to endure all this is to drive a Dodge Charger.
The social context that informs the reception of Man's last stand is the sociological debate about gender and especially the "poor boys" debate (a debate not about poverty or economic status but about social position; "poor" as in "unfortunate").xxxii The debate is about how boys and men become alienated by the educational system, how they lose the good job opportunities to the better educated women, and how in general they have little power over their everyday lives because of the empowerment of women and a general feminization of society.xxxiii
The commercial takes part in the debate and literally instructs the male viewer in a masculine construction process through the voice-over that emphasizes how far men go to please their girlfriends, wives, and bosses. The narration (attached to the video) highlights the breadwinner as self-sacrificing and in the need of a stronger feeling of masculinity: "You've sacrificed a lot, but surely there is a limit to your chivalry. Drive the car you want to drive."xxxiv
By speaking directly to the consumer through the use of "you" in the narration, the consumer is invited to put himself in the place of the men in the commercial and thereby to experience the emasculated tension of living the life of a breadwinner. xxxv The last man in the commercial introduces the solution about how to maintain a feeling of masculinity. Through his more upright posture and his power suit, he communicates a different and stronger masculinity than the three previous men (even if he is still in a business suit and not dressed as a cowboy, a costume clearly indicating the presence of an independent rebel).xxxvi The business suit implies that the last man is someone who can successfully balance the responsibility of the breadwinner with the independence of the rebel—he is not a cowboy, but he is also not a wimp. Thus, in the narrative of the commercial, the consumer is first confronted with his own lack of masculinity and next provided with a consumption solution to his problem.
The Man-of-Action Hero solution is underlined by the music in the commercial when the car is introduced. If the solution had been introduced as a more rebellious type, the music could have been rock music from The Rolling Stones or Guns 'n Roses. This type of music has even been termed "cock rock" by some feminists, underlining the aggressive and masculine characteristics of the music.xxxvii However, in the commercial, the music echoes James Bond movies, and thereby adds another component to the picture of the hegemonic masculinity. The music introduces a particular type of action hero (i.e., the American action hero of Harry Tasker (the Arnold Schwarzenegger character in the movie, True Lies, who leads a double life as family man and secret agent)/Chrysler/Dodge rather than the Bond/Aston Martin/Bentley). Combined with the comment about the consumers' chivalry, the music points to a kind of masculinity that can be chivalrous, but only till the bad guys needs a beating—then the gloves are off.
Irony
The ideological message about modern Western masculinity combined with the reception context of Super Bowl suggests that either Dodge and or the advertising agency are clueless about the family reception context or that the commercial is a calculated attempt to address their target audience in an authentic wayxxxviii and thereby speak directly to the latent unhappiness of the dependable breadwinner, since the reception context most likely involves both wives and children. Finally, the possibility exists that the commercial is actually ironic; that is, the ad is left open for ironic interpretation, so the backdoor response "it was meant as a joke" could be employed in case of angry consumers, or the ad is an ironic comment to the poor boys debate. In most cases of ironic intent, stylistic cues are laid out for the reader so as not to miss the irony.xxxix In other cases, however, the clues are not in the text; rather, context provides clues about ironic intent.xl The difficulty in defining what makes a text ironic consists in the elusiveness: Is irony in or around the text?xli In the end, irony is in the interpretation, and the consumer has to decide whether the message is to be understood in a literal sense or laugh it off as irony.xlii
Lars Pynt Andersen has developed the concept of the ironic selling proposition,xliii and before looking at the consumers' interpretations of Man's last stand, it is valuable to analyze whether Dodge is using irony as a means of effective advertising. In both Andersen's and Hirsch's definitions of irony, the important aspect is polysemy;xliv that is, the possibility exists that the text can be read in more than one way and that these readings are mutually exclusive.xlv Clearly, the proposition that Dodge is using irony deliberately requires that the consumer recognize the author-intended irony in the commercial.xlvi Thus, for the irony to work in advertising communication, the sender and the receiver of the commercial message must agree that this is an ironic text. Further, irony is not part of the identity construction talked about by Holt and Thompson because the ironic reception mode would require the consumer to distance him/herself from the text rather than identifying with it.
Distancing and thereby ironic reception is not likely in the context of Man's last stand because the message resonates with the societal debate of men being emasculated by women. Thus, even if they do not recognize themselves in the commercial,xlvii consumers will at least recognize the debate in the commercial rather than an ironic disruption by a grotesque portrayal.xlviii
In the analysis of the possible ironic intent of the commercial, the principal question, as noted above, is whether the readers identify with the male figure in the commercial or recognize the use of the poor boys debate as a strategy. Also important is whether other readers recognize these readings as legitimate readings. In the following, I present an analysis of comments on YouTube about the commercial to show how consumers negotiate the meanings and relations of this particular advertisement.
Method
Netnography and discourse analysis
The focus of the study is to investigate polysemy in the dialogic relationship between individual and collective readings of a commercial on YouTube. Thus, the data was collected using netnography, an anthropological method developed for online communities.xlix However, since netnography focuses on shared norms and values in communities,l the conflicts among the YouTube users made it necessary to employ a method that could address the disagreements. Discourse analysis is particularly suited for analyzing power. Richard Elliott has developed discourse analysis in a marketing context and points to its value in analyzing advertisements as constructive of interpretive communities because discourse analysis focuses on patterns of difference, power, and ideology,li and analyzes "interpretive repertoires."lii Thus, discourse analysis critically evaluates how the interpretive practices reproduce and reshape societal ideologies and myths in advertisements, and how advertising then becomes constitutive of the interpretive communities.
Data
The data include both textual and visual data to ensure an analysis of the wider communication process. Thus, three videos are included in the data material: Man's last stand, Dodge's 2010 Super Bowl commercial; Woman's last stand, the consumer-made video response to that commercial; and Getaway Car, a Dodge television commercial that ran at the same time as Man's last stand. The relationship between the texts occurs because the readers on YouTube clearly recognize that Woman's last stand as a response to Man's last stand and that the commercial is the underlying intertextual reference for the comments to Woman's last stand. Getaway Car is also related to the two videos in comments from readers, and because of its timing becomes part of the reception context for both Man's last stand and Woman's last stand. I have analyzed a total of 124 comments directly related to Man's last stand and 132 related to Woman's last stand.
To understand the chronological development of the discourse, I have selected the data from four different phases of the commentary: (1) from the first week after the launch on YouTube; (2) four weeks after the launch; (3) three months after the launch; and (4) six months after the launch. Regrettably, the commentary material for Getaway Car is limited. The commercial is no longer to be found on Dodge's channel on YouTube, yet it is present on YouTube as three different uploads by private users. The comments to Getaway Car are few, and the videos have hardly been viewed. One upload has no comments and has been seen 115 times,liii another has no comments and only 16 viewings,liv and the third has one comment and 504 viewings.lv Despite the lack of commentary, I argue that Getaway Car is Dodge's attempt to represent the women's voice and counter the anticipated critique of Man's last stand.
The videos
Man's last stand
In the Dodge video, a montage of four different males in their thirties to early forties are shown. The first three men have motionless faces. The only move they make is a shrug of their shoulders as if they were sighing. A voice-over supplements the impression of powerlessness and weakness by listing the things these men have to endure from their girlfriends, wives, and bosses. The last man in the video is the exception. He is dressed in a business suit, whereas the other men are dressed more casually. The last man in the video does not sigh; instead as the camera zooms in on his face, he stares back without any movement. He is completely calm, yet vigilant—this is a man who has not given up! And the audience soon understands why. As the camera zooms in on his eyes, a roaring sound is heard, and the video cuts into a Dodge racing into the unknown. The last man's last stand is his Dodge Charger, which makes up for all the pressure, pain, and frustration that life as an adult male living with women in a Western society entails.
Woman's last stand
There are many variations of video responses to Man's last stand on YouTube, and most of them are called Woman's last stand. The version of Woman's last stand included in this analysis is both typical and, as far as I have been able to gather, the most popular by vote and has the most comments.lvi The video is a paraphrase of Man's last stand only with angry women as protagonists in the montage. The voice-over lists inequalities that many women experience during their adult lives, such as lower pay, sexual harassment, and mediated pressure to look thin and beautiful. However, contrary to the Man's ad, there is no car in sight to offer the women a well-earned reprieve from an unjust and unpleasant life. The video's format as paraphrase is limited to the montage and the voice-over; it is not about selling cars, but about making a response to Dodge.
Getaway Car
The final video is about a woman who is leaving her boyfriend. She is seen standing on the lawn in front of a typical American suburban home at night. She seems resolute as she stands there watching her angry boyfriend throw stuff out of the upstairs window while he screams whether she is also tired of this or that particular object being thrown to the grass at the moment. Finally, he throws her jacket out. She bends down, but rather than take the jacket, she reaches into the pocket to get the car keys out. She turns around, walks to the car, gets in, and races off. The ending tagline is Dodge—we make getaway cars.
Analysis
The analysis is thematic with an emphasis on humor and irony, context, enunciation positions, and marketplace metacognition. First, however, I present the four discourses emerging out of the data:
The first discourse is supportive of the ideological message in the commercial; that is, men are oppressed, so they need a loud and fast car to make them feel masculine. An example of a supportive comment is: Get a car with ballz, get a charger! by liltommy1000. In this comment, the consumer uses the metaphor of a car with ballz to emphasize the message forwarded in the commercial—the car in itself is masculine and lends that masculinity to the driver. To have balls is a slang term for being audacious or courageous; thus, by describing the Dodge Charger in such terms, the consumer accentuates the heroic aspect of the hegemonic masculinity described by Holt and Thompsonlvii and connects it to the Charger. A similar comment, however more elaborate and somewhat radicalized, is the comment from pinworms70:
Every man should watch this. Then revolt as hard as their souls can manage against EVERY single point in this bull shit presentation. Right up until the part where you drive the car. Rage against this 21st century blasphemy that is supposed to represent what men are. Sell your house, divorce your wife, take your childrens college funds. Go buy a bad ass muscle car and ride it until the wheels fall off. Hit every bar, eat steak, bang whores, live free. But do it in a Dodge

This user pinpoints the supportive discourse, even if the comment is one of the more extreme. The supportive discourse recognizes "real" men's difficulty with resolving the negotiation of the breadwinner and rebel masculinity.lviii And what Pinworms70 suggests in his "manifesto" comment is that the rebellious longing for freedom is not recognized in the breadwinners' everyday life of mortgage, marriage, and children. Thus, the supportive consumers' everyday experiences resonate with the ideological message, and reading these comments, it feels like an explosion of textual recognition of a lived predicament.
The second discourse is critical of the ideological message; namely, the critical viewpoint is that women are the oppressed. Men are in power, they do not need a car to emphasize the power, and they do not become more masculine from driving a particular car. An example of a critical comment is by AudaciousSicilian:
What's with all of these Men's Rights Activist tools commenting here? Shouldn't you boys be doing something else, like whining about wives and lip balm, and puffing up your egos by buying a Dodge?

This comment ridicules the idea that men are oppressed and that the solution is to buy a car, and so displays a critical perspective on the commercial. Continuing in the same critical way is the comment from elko9er:
How shriveled does your manhood have to be before you think buying a car will make it all better?

Contrary to the previous comment, this comment recognizes the debate about masculinity but denies the solution presented in the commercial (buying a Dodge Charger will make a man more masculine). Thus, the comments in this discourse vary between recognizing the masculine negotiation between breadwinner and rebel, and denying a masculine crisis. In both cases, the discourse is critical both towards the masculine crisis as something that needs to be taken seriously and towards the proposed consumption solution as a way out of the masculine crisis.
The third discourse is an aesthetic discourse in which the readers comment on the commercial as an aesthetic object; namely, viewers comment on the voice-over or intertextual references in the commercial. An example could be: Hm. I know that narrator's voice....its Dexter! by WolfPackWB. Dexter is the main character from the television show Dexter. The comment reflects an aesthetic perspective linking the commercial to other popular cultural texts. The aesthetic discourse is also where the viewers share knowledge about other elements of the commercial (e.g., as here about the music):
SgtMatson:
Hey does anyone know the name of the song playing at the end??? please reply if you know thank you:D

GANDALFversusVADER:
we took vegas by deadly avenger

Feistypisces319:
woman like me by beyonce

As the exchange suggests, the aesthetic discourse is characterized by a more collaborative tone than the other discourses related to the commercial and for the interested viewers the aesthetic discourse provides interpretive clues. (Although it should be noted that the response by Feistypisces319 could be ironic given that the music is, in fact, "We Took Vegas" by DJ Deadly Avenger.)
The last discourse is related to the product, the car, and is mainly evaluative, for example:
Skeletorphd:
Now if only a dodge charger was worth spending actual money on

This comment is critical of the Dodge Charger; however, there were an almost equal amount of comments in favor of the car. Many comments are not just product evaluations but connect to the commercial as well; thus, a positive evaluation of the car and commercial in some cases go together.
Latinavixn:
I don't find this commercial offensive at all. I'm a female and I friggin love my Charger, have the exact model from the ad and I'd friggin live in it if I could! LoL! Great commercial.

As the comment by Latinavixn shows, the debate divides the viewers between critical and supportive of the ideological message in the commercial, but also between potential Dodge-owners and the others. The relationship between the ideological message in the commercial and the car is also present in some of the comments to Woman's last stand:
Rocktron2000:
So wait, what kind of car do these women get to drive?

Rocktron2000 points to the lack of resolution in Woman's last stand, where no car is offered as a solution to the oppression women experience.
For both Man's last stand and Woman's last stand, the critical discourse is strongest in the comments closer to the launch of the ad, and the supportive discourse grows stronger over time. In other words, the critical discourse of the commercial seems to be inspired by an immediate anger and a need for addressing the message in the advertising. This is also characteristic of the comments made to Woman's last stand, where, for example, the user prettydoll comments this way:
This is awesome! That commercial was so misogynist.

Within the first three months, the number of critical comments decrease, and the supportive comments increase. And the number of comments supportive of Dodge related to the Woman's last stand is very high (a ratio of three-to-one after three months). This suggests that the immediate anger felt by the critical consumers subsides when the commercial is no longer running on TV. However, the increase in supportive comments suggests that the spread of the critical responses spurs supporters to counter the critique. Thus, what motivates many of the comments is not the brand but rather the ideological message in the commercial—that men can no longer be considered oppressors by default, rather they are oppressed too.
Intertextual masculinity
Man's last stand is not only embedded in the gender discourse. The commercial is in many ways embedded into the cultural discourses of YouTube and popular culture. Consider, for example, the response to the use of familiar faces and voices in the commercial.
AwesomeSauce1000:
?!?!? The man with the scruffy beard!!! That's noah, from the 'picture a day for 6 years'!!! I think...lemme know if you think so

As recognized by the user, Noah is a YouTube celebrity because he took a picture of himself everyday for six years and turned it into a video on YouTube. Noah's movie has inspired many people, and, in fact, the one-photo-a-day video has become its own genre on YouTube. In the commercial, the third guy in the montage is actually Noah. This intertextual quote involving Noah adds a layer of "the everyday" and triviality to the three first guys in the video because Noah's project was to wipe out the uniqueness of the single day by making a series of pictures that by the length of time it takes to view the video and the change in appearance over that time annihilates singularity, leaving the transformation of the young man into a tired and tried man. Thus, the commercial's use of Noah emphasizes the contrast to the last man, who has a completely different posture than the three men shown previously in the ad. Noah also legitimizes the commercial's presence on YouTube through the genre relationship to other one-photo- a-day videos. And Noah thereby creates a link to other videos and establishes a textual network in which the commercial can circulate.
Another intertextual reference is the voice-over, which many of the YouTube viewers distinguish as Dexter.
TheVelma16:
dexter sound like he going to kill one of these people to take the car.

The voice belongs to the actor Michael C. Hall who plays Dexter in the television show. Dexter is by day a forensic specialist working for the Miami Police, but by night he is a serial killer. Thus, as the user here recognizes, the invisible presence of Dexter alludes to a general stereotype about men; namely, no matter how civilized, loving, and caring your husband, brother, boyfriend, or father appears, there is always the risk of unraveling of the beast within—that he will actually kill for a car. Thus, men, because of the brutal "nature" of masculinity, must always be considered as potential predators. The recognizable voice of Dexter here functions to remind us that men may seem cultured, educated, and polite, but they are still beasts. The wider discourse on emasculated men articulated by the voice-over thus highlights the pitiful state the first three men are in.
But the last part of the commercial changes the story. From the last strong man, the video cuts into a more traditional car commercial showing the car from various viewpoints as it races into the future. The first clip has the open horizons in front of the car, and as such the advertising could be promising freedom to the emasculated men through the freedom of the open road by invoking the road movie genre. Yet, the music in the last part seems to contradict the visual hint of the road movie. The music paraphrases the characteristic brass sound of the James Bond themelix and thereby suggests a completely different interpretation. I suggest that the intertextuality implied by the James Bond reference could be to the already mentioned Harry Tasker from True Lies. This Man-of-Action Hero is a refined enough to aspire to a James Bond-esque high-flying lifestyle with the same tongue-in-cheek humor, yet has the raw strength of the action hero to get the job done paired with the breadwinner's loyalty to his wife. In the commercial, the Man-of-Action Hero becomes the solution to the articulated experience of emasculation.
Irony
When analyzing Man's last stand and the consumer responses to it, irony seems to be a challenge in the communication. It could be argued that the first part of the commercial displaying the tame breadwinners is an example of an ironic negative scenario. An ironic negative scenario involves a level of absurdity that exaggerates the problem of the commercial to a level where the problem cannot be taken seriously and thereby the commercial gains a polysemic interpretation level.lx In Man's last stand, the absurdity could be inferred from the voice-over's exaggerations of men's emasculations (e.g., how men carry their girlfriend's lip balm and have to watch vampire shows). The problem arises in the recognition by the consumers, where the readings by the supportive consumers in general find the commercial funny because they recognize the situations.
Incognito1986:
HAHAHA! I love the look of the last guy with the camera zooming in. LOLZ! Vampire TV shows. That's my girlfriend.

In this case, Incognito1986 underlines the reference to vampire shows and points out that this is indeed a part of his life helxi recognizes. Thus, this consumer is not seeing this as an ironic exaggeration of his life; rather, he laughs because he recognizes his own life.
A slightly different interpretation comes from cronos245 as he paraphrases the voice-over style of the commercial:
(The single individual): I will wonder why I am alone in bed again at 6:30 in the morning. Then I will eat a full breakfast and watch my recorded tv show I missed last night. I will go to work and hang out with friends till late that night afterwards, and just when I think I might be lonely; I see this superbowl add [sic] and realize why I haven't given myself over to the double standard that is a relationship beyond sex.

In this quote, cronos245, like Incognito2986, interprets the commercial as depicting the lives of men somewhat truthfully. However, this user does not recognize himself as Incognito1986 did; to the contrary, cronos245 sees exactly what life he does not want to live. Yet, the interpretation of the commercial is still that it represents the breadwinners' lives in a nonironic way since cronos245 denounces life in a committed relationship on the grounds of the portrayal in the commercial.
In all the 124 comments I analyzed, I found only one mentioning irony.
iCheckVtec:
The irony is the name of the song at the end is "A woman like me".

This user points to the name of the song as a textual disjuncture that exposes the irony of the commercial's statement of the emasculated breadwinners. It is necessary to elaborate on two points in relation to this comment. The user has recognized the song incorrectly. As already mentioned, the song used at the end is "We Took Vegas" by Deadly Avenger. Thus, underlining the theoretical perspective that irony most certainly is in the act of interpretation,lxii the irony here results from a misreading of the text. Further, it is not clear whether the user actually thinks the irony is intended. The negative smiley at the end of the comment suggests that either the joke is on the supportive consumers because they did not recognize the song, or that Dodge and their advertising agency did not think the use of that particular song through, since the title "A Woman Like Me" seems to suggest that the men in the commercial are women (or behaving like a stereotype of women).
Thus, if the intent behind Man's last stand is ironic, it is only by mistake the readers perceive it as such. In the case of Man's last stand, the literal reading of the commercial is the root to the oppositional debate that takes place on YouTube. The commercial, for example, could be meant as an ironic comment to the poor boys debate. Another possible explanation for the strategy of the commercial, however, can be found in Holt's article.lxiii Irony as a marketing strategy is something of the past according to Holt. Whereas irony was creative and fun in the 1990's, it has now turned into a cliché.lxiv Currently, convincing branding strategies strive to create an authentic brand in a culturally coherent sense.lxv In this understanding, authentic brands are vehicles for consumers' construction of meaning. Given this reading, the Dodge commercial points to a different interpretation. The main point for Holt is that the now post-postmodern brands inspire, provoke, and stimulate the imagination of the consumers and participate in creating new interpretations of the world. In the case of Man's last stand, it may not be a new interpretation of the world or an ironic comment on it, but the commercial points to an experienced crisis in masculinity and a connected conflict in the modern female/male relationship. Consequently, many consumers felt an urge to debate the discourse on gender in their comments on the commercial. Thus, the consumers become engaged through the brand's participation in their social reality; that is, the brand enters into the interpretive community's context by displaying a culturally coherent practice of discourse. At the same time, however, the debate allows the consumption of the commercial to become the drama of the everyday as described by Holt and Thompson.lxvi As they explain, the drama deepens the consumption experience and casts the consumer as the protagonist of the drama. In this case, the consumers supporting the message in Man's last stand become the Man-of-Action Heroes who take the stand and defend their masculinity. As such, the lack of irony permits the consumers to use the commercial for a dramatic enactment of masculinity that again plays into their possible acquisition of a Dodge Charger.
Speaking positions
The dramatic enactment of masculinity does not go unnoticed by other less supportive consumers. A critical debate is raised especially through the video response in Woman's last stand. Thus, the gender debate that many people seem tired of having is infused with vitality through the commercial on YouTube. However, the challenge for Dodge in this case is to negotiate the feedback from the YouTube users as they respond differently than the brand community of consumers. Thus, the questions for Dodge are Is the strong emotional response on YouTube actually desirable?, and Are the comments and the spreading of comments useful for marketing?
The critical eye
Unlike a commercial on television, the video on YouTube allows interactive comment, which allows opponents of the ad to be heard. The criticism concerns the commercial's underlying premise of the poor boys debate, which many of the critical readers question (e.g., What is oppression?; Does the description by the men in the commercial of their lives describe a life of oppression?)
calamitynexus :
How the hell is being expected to clean your hair out of the sink oppression? Next you might be expected to. DO YOUR DISHES! (OH NOES)

Calamitynexus here questions whether the examples of oppression in the commercial really can count as oppression and seems to suggest that cleaning the sink and doing the dishes is what should be expected from any grown up. Thus, by quoting the voice-over's complaints about removing hair from the sink, the viewer frames the cultural discourse in the commercial text and relates it to the social discourse in the lives of viewers—a life in which dishes have to be done. Another viewer takes the critical viewpoint further when commenting on the breadwinner as an idealistic stereotype.
snakfly :
Putting images out of this idealistic masculinity, and how white, middle class men are oppressed sends inappropriate messages to the public. You should really try and discard your close-mindedness and realize that any type of discrimination is inappropriate.

By referring to idealistic masculinity and white, middle-class men, snakfly recognizes the Dodge Charger segment and even though there is a black man in the commercial, the comment points right to the interpretation of how white middle-class masculinity is portrayed in public debate as threatened and emasculated. The commentator does not accept this premise and even suggests that the public might be affected by the message.
Thus the comment from snakfly highlights how the commercial uses the poor boys debate by stating that all men live in a feminized world.
Deconstruction
Woman's last stand also lacks ironic disjunctures. It seems, however, that the producer of the parody was not promoting an ironic interpretation. Where the men in Man's last stand stare hopelessly into the camera, the women frown, lift their eyebrows disapprovingly, or find other ways to show contempt for the poor boys premise through their facial expressions. In many ways, the spoof transforms the masculine hero of the original commercial into a woman but changes the focus to real anger rather than a "limp" complaint. The process of transformation from one position into a more subordinate one is a classic method of deconstructing the superior's ideological message and has, in relation to advertising, been described by Barbara Stern.lxvii In this case, viewers have taken over the deconstructive method and applied it to the commercial. The deconstruction is not so much of the message itself, but rather a deconstruction of the speaking positions marked by masculine and feminine gender traits. In Man's last stand, the men can complain about their daily lives as emasculated and domesticated men, but when the women do the same in Woman's last stand, they are read as inauthentic by the male viewers because the immediate response places them in the discourse of angry feminists.
Smith35KC:
Really if you watch the "Mans last stand" you can even tell that it was a joke, it had humor all over it, none of those things were suppose to be offense, it was all good humor lol, but you can hear the anger and malice in the womens [sic] tone of voice, making it go from funny to a "Payback" and wow that's kinda lame, this just shows that this women [sic] is a HUGE SEXIST BITCH and is a crybaby about all of this and needs to quit whining and just take a joke This would be funny but you were a bitch about it.

In this elaborate comment on Woman's last stand, Smith35KC frames the women as whining bitches who can't take a joke. In the comment, the claim is that the female voice-over in the video response is angry and malicious. However, the comment does not elaborate on the voice-over in Man's last stand but claims that the commercial was a joke through and through. The conclusion of the comment is that women can't take a joke, and certainly the video response in the eyes of the commentator does not count as funny.
Other comments relate more directly to the discourse of the emasculated breadwinners, who are outperformed by women.
NyBob85 :
The vast majority of commercials on television nowadays depict men as functionally retarded buffoons and comic foils to their strong, sassy, independent wives. One ad airs that dare hints at male empowerment in an increasingly misandristic culture and the feminists have a shit fit over it.

In this comment by NyBob85, the discourse on emasculated breadwinners is read through other commercials that apparently depict men as functionally retarded buffoons and put into a framework of misandry. Man's last stand is read as aiming to empower men, but that message is countered by feminists. The comment underlines the dichotomist discourse on gender in today's Western society. Thus the viewers' co-creation of meaning is informed by their embeddedness in the culture.
The male viewers are not in the same way read as angry masculinists by other viewers, even though a strong movement of masculinists actually advocates the same discourse as the Dodge commercial.lxviii Because certain culturally and socially embedded ideas exist about male and female, men can perform authentically as the domesticated animal, only able to return to his "natural" life when he gets into his big muscle car.
jrsavalache:
Why were these bitches making some stupid video and not in the kitchen cooking me dinner?

Women, on the other hand, cannot be understood as domesticated to the same degree because the stereotype about women is that they are naturally not wild animals—if anything, they are domestic kittens. As the comment by jrsavalanche shows, contrary to men, the stereotype about women is that they belong at home in the kitchen and, therefore, when women complain about the life they supposedly are destined by nature to live, they are perceived as inauthentic and angry feminists by some.
Thus, there is a tendency to read Man's last stand as funny. Woman's last stand, however, is not understood in the same way. As Stern points out, men and women have different possibilities of expression, which is made clear by the comments on the commercial and the responses.lxix
xXmasterbasserXx : Men poking fun at women is funny.
Women poking fun at men is not.
'Tis the way of the world.
This comment highlights the interpretation that Man's last stand was meant as a joke, whereas the response as seen in Woman's last stand is not—not necessarily because Woman's last stand is not humorous but because it is just not funny when women try to make fun of men.
damienca2ga:
There were a couple of funny parts, but really ladies, you couldn't just let us have this one?

And even if Woman's last stand has its funny moments, as damienca2ga points out, the joke is ruined because it is a response to Man's last stand; that is, the female viewers should not point out the ludicrous claims of Man's last stand but, rather, let it pass in graceful silence. Thus, the female viewers are cast as angry feminists without a sense of humor, while the male viewers are cast as funny yet misunderstood. The reception also shows that not only are the valid expressions of men and women different from each other, but also male and female "protagonists" are received differently. In other words, the tendency is to read men as humorous and women as complaining. This is prevalent in the reception of both Man's last stand and Woman's last stand by men and by women.
Thus, the discussion attached to Dodge's commercial implies that the discourse on gender equality is trenchant in the interpretive community that has been evoked by the commercial. The comments overflow with strong expressions, such as "feminazis" and "weiny [sic] bitches," which suggests that the commentators have a strong emotional involvement in the discourse. At stake here is the political, social, and cultural discourse on gender and the various appraisals of it. As a culturally embedded corporation, Dodge has entered into one of the omnipresent discourses in today's Western world. The viewers are caught in a discourse with very limited possibilities, which in turn polarizes the evaluations of the interpretation. In this case, the commercial becomes a battleground that allows consumers to negotiate and challenge the discourse, thereby entering the dialogue and co-creating meaning. In sum, the cultural discourse is coupled with the marketplace meta-cognition, and the usually implicit assumptions about other consumers and their knowledge and behavior occurs in the discursive space of YouTube where the discourse is laid out openly.
Marketplace meta-cognition
Interestingly, it seems that Dodge has envisaged more perspectives on the discourse by making the commercial Getaway Car, which places a woman as the strong, no nonsense, and independent character. The viewing ratings and comments attached to this second commercial were nowhere near as numerous as they were Man's last stand, and since it has been removed from Dodge's official channel, the material related to Getaway Car is limited. However, a few viewers do comment on the relationship between Man's last stand and Getaway Car.
dirkaltman:
My girlfriend loves this commercial as I drive a charger awesome car (my opinion) and the fact I do carry her lip balm from time to time and watch her vampire tv shows with her etc. not sure why so many people have such a problem with this video maybe you need a boyfriend who cares about you and it might be relatable? if you prefer there is a video called "we make getaway cars" that targets female consumers and show some guy being an ahole.

As other comments have shown, the initial response here is one of identification with the character in Man's last stand. Dirkaltman tries to imagine why so many viewers are angry about Man's last stand and comes to the conclusion that maybe the problem arises because the angry viewers do not recognize themselves in the commercial. Thus, he goes on to suggest that maybe Getaway Car to female consumers depicts a story that is easier for them to relate to. Other comments also elaborate on who the commercials are targeted at.
Moparguy383cc:
has anybody noticed that there's this commercial and then there's the one where the girl is standing outside while a boyfriend/husband/whatever is throwing all her stuff in the yard and then she picks up a set of keys gets in THE SAME DAMN CAR, and drives away with a smile on her face? So one might think, huh a commercial aimed at the MALE half of our target audience, and then one with a woman "impowering [sic] herself" by driving the car for the FEMALE half. big picture? Dodge wants to sell cars, duh

The commentator here highlights the relationship between the two commercials by Dodge and goes on to analyze their target audiences as respectively male and female. The comment also underlines the critical perspective that each commercial is not just an aesthetic or entertaining text, but rather that both texts are made with the purpose of persuading consumers to buy cars and, because of the two different target audiences, different texts have to be employed.
However, Getaway Car did not resonate with the audience to the same extent that Man's last stand did. Part of the reason has to do with media convergence. Messages spread across media forms— and especially a commercial shown during Super Bowl—are amplified. But the gender discourse is also significantly reduced in Getaway Car. Anyone can experience the need for a getaway car, but Man's last stand unmistakably echoes the poor boys debate and through that actualizes the interpretive community. Thus, the commercial Man's last stand dis-embeds a social, political, and cultural discourse from ordinary public space and political world and re-embeds it into popular culture in the commercial and onto YouTube, where the interpretive community emerges. The success of Man's last stand is directly related to the commercial's triumphant articulation of the Man-of-Action Hero and thereby the direct address of a negotiation about masculinity that many men dramatize through consumption.lxx
It seems that the commercial address of a similar femininity negotiation has been less to the point and thereby lacking authenticity to the audience. Where Man's last stand reaches directly into the hearts of American men by taking their masculinity seriously, Getaway Car is not as precise when it comes to understanding American women's existential dilemma. The American Girl prototype may be fun-loving, self-reliant, and audacious;lxxi as she is portrayed in Getaway Car, however, she is less than likable. She seems cold and unsympathetic to her ex-boyfriend as she races away in the car. And thus, as the user dirkaltman has emphasized, the necessary recognition of "woman" is lacking— the female target audience may simply not recognize themselves in the commercial and thereby not feel a need to interact with the message.
Further, the break-up story is a generic one, and even if it is supposed to be empowering to women, since the girl is the one walking away, the story does not pinpoint the feminine condition specifically. Rather, the woman in Getaway Car ends up portraying the rebel that the male audience is trying to incorporate into their breadwinner lifestyle. The trouble is that the rebel is too antisocial to exist on its own. However, in Getaway Car, there is no reconciliation between the independent yet antisocial rebel girl and a girl-character that belongs in society. As a commercial message, Getaway Car ends up polluting the stronger message of the Dodge Charger as a solution to the masculine negotiation between the breadwinner and the rebel. Consequently, one can speculate that Getaway Car has been removed to create an unambiguous message to the consumers. In this case, Dodge has foreseen the response from the interpretive community, but they haven't built it into the original commercial; rather, they have made a different manifestation of the discourse. The text of Getaway Car renders a woman as the strong independent person who lacks the interest or capacity to engage in a conversation about the break-up. In fact, this portrayal of women highlights the other side of the poor boys debate: women have become so independent and free that they no longer need or care about men; rather, women have become (ab)users of men.
In this case, the difficulty for Dodge seems to have been understanding the social discourse of the poor boys versus the angry feminists. However, since Getaway Car has been removed, it seems as if the viewers were right: Getaway Car may have been made as a safety net by Dodge to cater to both target groups. However, the animated debate surrounding Man's last stand seems to have made Dodge aware of Getaway Car's muddled message and the cluttering of Man's last stand's message. Thus, the removal of Getaway Car has created a more unanimous voice from Dodge and an unambiguous stance in the gender debate, embracing their male viewers' masculinity issues.
Polysemy, dialogue, and marketplace meta-cognition
This analysis shows how the users on YouTube interact with the ideological meaning of an ad. Overall, the analysis reveals that the users agree on the ad's meaning; none of them seem to disagree that this ad is about troubled modern Western masculinity. Where the users disagree and polysemy occurs is on the valuation of whether the message is meaningful or truthful. The discourse analysis demonstrates how users negotiate and challenge each others' valuation of the ad meaning. Thus, whereas all users recognize Dodge's use of the masculinity discourse, some viewers contest the message, others recognize themselves in the portrayal of modern Western Masculinity, and others again try to distance themselves from the discourse through ironic gestures or by reflecting on the possible humorous intent behind the ad.
The negotiations of meaning on YouTube show us how users interpret and develop meaning in dialogue with other users and their interpretations. Through their personal experiences and emotions, they all participate in a dialogue with Dodge about men and masculinity, and together they form the imagined community in which the commercial resonates. For Dodge, the initiator of the dialogue, the act of balance is to leave the dialogue open and at the same time to try to respond to the most critical viewers. By removing the ad Getaway Car from their channel with no further explanation, Dodge, however, seems to have radicalized the dialogue.
The preliminary result of Dodge's decision is a simplification of the message so as to avoid polysemic interpretations. Yet, the polysemic readings of the users were not about the message itself, but rather about the value or usefulness of the message. Thus, through part of the consumer response to Man's last stand, Dodge became aware that it hit its male segment right where modern masculinity is most threatened and at the same time provided a discursive opportunity to recognize and come to terms with the masculine crisis. Getaway Car did not to the same extent nail modern femininity issues and therefore failed to engage the consumers. The messages of the two commercials became "uneven" and because of Getaway Car's failure to provide an equally insightful message for the female audience, the communications seemed to suggest an equally uneven balance of sympathy and empathy with male and female consumers. Further, the YouTube users' reception of the ads point out the uneven understanding of the conditions of men and women, especially through the independent creation of the response contained in Woman's last stand.
Thus, this case shows that even when consumers read the same message and interpret the same ideological meaning in the message, they can still form very different evaluations of the truthfulness and significance of the message.
Further, the analysis also shows that the users, besides forming their own assessments of the message, are also sophisticated readers when it comes to separating ad, brand, and product. Thus, part of the reader's/viewer's ability is to read commercials as consumers and understand that they are approached as consumers. They also recognize the persuasive intent built into this form of communication. Consequently, this analysis gives evidence of consumers' marketplace meta-cognition.
As such, it seems that it is precisely this meta-cognitive awareness that lets the consumers look through the persuasive intent of selling and provokes them to read deeper into the ideological messages presented by the commercials. In sum, the consciousness of the selling proposition in the commercial does not make the consumers dismiss the commercial as text, not even when they intend to buy the product. In fact, viewers are compelled to engage in the production of dialogic meaning in which the commercial text works as more than a selling proposition (e.g., when it dramatizes a masculine negotiation of identity). Per se, polysemy seems to be a fundamental aspect of reading, which explains why consumers can read and understand meanings that contradict their own experience or life projects.
Conclusion
This paper has explored polysemic readings as they emerge among users commenting on a commercial on YouTube. The case shows that polysemy is about readers in dialogue with the collective imagined community around them and the text. Thus, this paper contributes to advertising theory by showing how meaning is not linear and stable; rather, it emerges in processes among readers and acquires significance in the meeting with individual contexts. Thus polysemy is not about the more or less open text that allows readers to form more or less oppositional meanings; conversely, polysemy is part of the reading process itself as it unfurls.
Social media allow us to observe the mundane reading practices as they unfold, and thereby the polysemic negotiations become apparent. This study therefore goes beyond Hall's three possible readings and show that the reading process itself incorporates and negotiates meaning, not as a linear transfer of meaning from sender to text to reader, but as a process of dialogue and confrontation with: the text; other readers; the social, cultural, and commercial context; and individual perspective. Therefore this paper contributes to our understanding of polysemy by changing the focus from whether a reader accepts the intended or preferred meaning to a differentiation between reading the preferred meaning and whether to accept that meaning as important or significant. This paper thus suggests that polysemy consists in the possibility of reading and understanding the preferred meaning, but also in developing further perspectives.
Gry Høngsmark Knudsen  
Gry Høngsmark Knudsen is a Doctoral Student in Marketing at the University of Southern Denmark. She has a Masters and a Bachelors degree in Art History and a supplementary degree in Gender, Communications, and Culture from University of Aarhus. Gry was visiting as a Recognized Student at Saïd Business School, Oxford University in 2011.

References
i. David Glen Mick and Claus Buhl, "A Meaning-Based Model of Advertising Experiences," Journal of Consumer Research 19, no. 3 (1992).

ii. Stefano Putoni, Jonathan E. Schroeder, and Mark Ritson, "Meaning Matters: Polysemy in Advertising," Journal of Advertising 39, no. 2 (2010). 52

iii. Stuart Hall, "Encoding/ Decoding," in Culture, Media, Language: Working Papers in Cultural Studies, 1972-79, ed. Stuart Hall (Birmingham: The Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, University of Birmingham, 1973).

iv. John R. Rossiter and Larry Percy, "Visual Imaging Ability as a Mediator of Advertising Response," Advances in Consumer Research (1978); John R. Rossiter and Larry Percy, "Attitude Change through Visual Imagery in Advertising," Journal of Consumer Research 9, no. 2 (1980); John R. Rossiter, "Predicting Starch Scores," Journal of Advertising Research 21, no. 5 (1981); John R. Rossiter, "Visual Imagery: Applications to Advertising," Advances in Consumer Research 9(1982); Andrew A Mitchell, "The Effect of Verbal and Visual Components of Advertisements on Brand Attitudes and Attitude toward the Advertisement," Journal of Consumer Research 13 June(1986).

v. Michael Schudson, Advertising, the Uneasy Persuasion. Its Dubious Impact on American Society (New York: Basic Books, 1984); Karl Marx, Capital, ed. David McLellan, Oxford World's Classics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1867/1995).

vi. Judith Williamson, Decoding Advertisments. Ideology and Meaning in Advertising (London: Marion Boyars, 1978).

vii. Natalia Yannopoulou and Richard Elliott, "Open Versus Closed Advertising Texts and Interpretive Communities," International Journal of Advertising 27, no. 1 (2008).

viii. Stephanie O'Donohoe, "Raiding the Postmodern Pantry: Advertising Intertextuality and the Young Adult Audience," European Journal of Marketing 31, no. 3 (1997); Stephanie O'Donohoe and Caroline Tynan, "Beyond Sophistication: Dimensions of Advertising Literacy," International Journal of Advertising 17, no. 4 (1998); Stephanie O'Donohoe, "Living with Ambivalence: Attitudes to Advertising in Postmodern Times," Marketing Theory 1, no. 1 (2001).

ix. Marian Friestad and Peter Wright, "Persuasion Knowledge: Lay People's and Researchers' Beliefs About the Psychology of Advertising," Journal of Consumer Research 22, no. 1 (1995); Peter Wright, "Marketplace Metacognition and Social Intelligence," Journal of Consumer Research 28 March (2002); Linda M. Scott, "The Bridge from Text to Mind: Adapting Reader-Response Theory to Consumer Research," Journal of Consumer Research 21, no. 3 (1994).

x. Jonathan E. Schroeder, "Visual Consumption in the Image Economy," in Elusive Consumption, ed. Karin M. Ekström and Helene Brembeck (Oxford: Oxford International Publishers Ltd., 2004).

xi. Also known as the forensic expert/ serial killer Dexter from the television show Dexter

xii. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RyPamyWotM&list=FLmVrWHqn_5pjroB-fMIycoQ&index=26 8/22/2011

xiii. Scott, "The Bridge from Text to Mind: Adapting Reader-Response Theory to Consumer Research."

xiv. David Bordwell, "Historical Poetics of Cinema," in The Cinematic Text: Methods and Approaches, ed. R. Barton Palmer (New York: AMS Press, 1989). 385

xv. Schudson, Advertising, the Uneasy Persuasion. Its Dubious Impact on American Society.

xvi. Williamson, Decoding Advertisments. Ideology and Meaning in Advertising.

xvii. Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Craig J. Thompson, "Why Media Matter: Toward a Richer Understanding of Consumers' Relationship with Media," Journal of Advertising 26, no. 1 (1997); Craig J. Thompson and Elizabeth C. Hirschman, "Understanding the Socialized Body: A Poststructuralist Analysis of Consumers' Self-Conceptions, Body Images, and Self-Care Practices," Journal of Consumer Research 22, no. 2 (1995).

xviii. Alice E. Courtney and Thomas W. whipple, Sex Stereotyping in Advertising (Lexington: Lexington Books, 1983).

xix. Scott, "The Bridge from Text to Mind: Adapting Reader-Response Theory to Consumer Research."; Linda M. Scott, " Expanding Rhetoric," in Go Figure! New Directions in Advertising Rhetoric, ed. Edward F. McQuarrie and Barbara J. Phillips (Armonk: M. E. Sharpe, 2008); Linda M. Scott, "Theoretical Realism: Culture and Politics in Commercial Imagery," in Explorations in Consumer Culture Theory, ed. John F. Sherry Jr and Eileen Fischer (London: Routledge, 2009).

xx. Linda M. Scott and Patrick Vargas, "Postindustrial Pictography. Learning the Coding Logics," Journal of Consumer Research (2007).

xxi. Mick and Buhl, "A Meaning-Based Model of Advertising Experiences."

xxii. >Moss E. Norman, "Embodying the Doble-Bind of Masculinity: Young Men and Discourses of Normalcy, Health, Heterosexuality, and Individualism," Men and Masculinities 14, no. 4 (2011).

xxiii. James Gentry and Robert Harrison, "Is Advertising a Barrier to Male Movement toward Gender Change?," Marketing Theory 10, no. 1 (2010).

xxiv. Linda Tuncay Zayer, "A Typology of Men's Conceptualizations of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising," Advertising & Society Review 11, no. 1 (2010).

xxv. Jonathan E. Schroeder and D. Zwick, "The Gaze, the Male Body, and Advertising: A Visual Analysis," in Association for Consumer Research (Columbus, Ohio 1999). Jonathan E. Schroeder and Detlev Zwick, "Mirrors of Masculinity: Representation and Identity in Advertising Images," Consumption, Markets & Culture 7, no. 1 (2004).

xxvi. Schroeder and Zwick, "The Gaze, the Male Body, and Advertising: A Visual Analysis."

xxvii. Douglas Holt and Craig Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption," Journal of Consumer Research 31, no. September (2004).

xxviii. Zayer, "A Typology of Men's Conceptualizations of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising."

xxix. Ibid.

xxx. Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption."

xxxi. Brett Martin and Juergen Gnoth, "Is the Marlboro Man the Only Alternative? The Role of Gender Identity and Self-Construal Salience in Evaluations of Male Models," Marketing Letters 20, no. 4 (2009).

xxxii. Michael Kimmel, "What About the Boys?," in Critical Social Issues in American Education: Democracy and Meaning in a Globalizing World, ed. H. Svi. Shapiro and David E. Purpel (Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Inc., 2004).

xxxiii. Ibid; Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption."

xxxiv. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RyPamyWotM&list=FLmVrWHqn_5pjroB-fMIycoQ&index=26 8/22/2011

xxxv. Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption." 427.

xxxvi. Ibid., 427

xxxvii. Theo Cateforis, ed. The Rock History Reader (New York: Routledge,2006). 125

xxxviii. Douglas Holt, "Why Do Brands Cause Trouble? A Dialectical Theory of Consumer Culture and Branding," Journal of Consumer Research 29, no. June (2002).87

xxxix. E. D. Hirsch, The Aims of Interpretation (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1976)., 24

xl. Ibid., 25

xli. Lars Pynt Andersen, "Ironic Branding? The Concept of Ironic Selling Propositions in Danish Tv-Ads," in ACR (Dublin2003)., 4-5

xlii. Ibid., 6

xliii. Ibid.

xliv. Ibid., 6 and Hirsch, The Aims of Interpretation. 107

xlv. Hirsch, The Aims of Interpretation., 107

xlvi. Andersen, "Ironic Branding? The Concept of Ironic Selling Propositions in Danish Tv-Ads." 7

xlvii. Scott, "The Bridge from Text to Mind: Adapting Reader-Response Theory to Consumer Research." 473.

xlviii. Barbara B. Stern, "Masculinism(S) and the Male Image: What Does It Mean to Be a Man?," in Sex in Advertising, ed. Tom Reichert and Jacqeline Lambiase (New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers, 2003).

xlix. R.V. Kozinets, Netnography: Doing Ethnographic Research Online (Sage Publications Ltd, 2009). 5

l. Ibid., 9.

li. R. Elliott, "Discourse Analysis: Exploring Action, Function and Conflict in Social Texts," Marketing Intelligence and Planning 14, no. 6 (1996). 67; Stanley E. Fish, "Interpreting the Variorum," Critical Inquiry 2, no. 3 (1976).

lii. Elliott, "Discourse Analysis: Exploring Action, Function and Conflict in Social Texts.", 66.

liii. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iptrj_kEEEY&feature=feedf 8/21/2011

liv. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mWfoFZdQc1c&feature=related 8/21/2011

lv. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sro4p_f9HZE&feature=feedf 8/21/2011

lvi. Viewers have voted 4,103 times ("like" and "dislike" combined), 3,342 comments, and 437,532 views.

lvii. Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption."

lviii. Ibid.

lix. The music is We took Vegas by the DJ Deadly Avenger. Thus it is not a musical theme from a James Bond movie, but it has strong connotations to the James Bond theme through the full orchestration, brass fanfares, and dramatic arrangement.

lx. Andersen, "Ironic Branding? The Concept of Ironic Selling Propositions in Danish Tv-Ads." 10

lxi. In general, it is difficult to know the gender behind an alias on YouTube because even if an individual gives one's gender, they may be lying. On social media like YouTube with so many users there is no social control that necessitates users to tell the truth. Danah Boyd, "None of This Is Real: Identity and Participation in Friendster," in Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, ed. J. Karaganis (New York: Social Science Research Council, 2007).

lxii. Hirsch, The Aims of Interpretation. 25.

lxiii. Holt, "Why Do Brands Cause Trouble? A Dialectical Theory of Consumer Culture and Branding."

lxiv. Ibid., 86

lxv. Ibid., 87

lxvi. Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption." p. 438

lxvii. Barbara B. Stern, "Feminist Literary Criticism and the Deconstruction of Ads: A Postmodern View of Advertising and Consumer Responses," Journal of Consumer Research 19, no. 4 (1993).

lxviii. Led by, for example, Rich Zubaty, author of What Men Know That Women Don't: How to Love Women Without Losing Your Soul (2001)

lxix. Stern, "Feminist Literary Criticism and the Deconstruction of Ads: A Postmodern View of Advertising and Consumer Responses." 561.

lxx. Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption." 438.

lxxi. Linda M. Scott, Fresh Lipstick. Redressing Fashion and Feminism (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005).101.

Copyright © 2012 The Advertising Educational Foundation, Inc
Advertising & Society Review
Volume 13, Issue 2, 2012

Research Areas
Social Sciences > Business and Society
Recommend
Email a link to this page
  


“Know that I, Ringo the drummer, am”: Shakespeare, YouTube, and the Limits of Performance 
“Know that I, Ringo the drummer, am”: Shakespeare, YouTube, and the Limits of Performance 
The New Intimacy: <i>rihannaboi95</i> and Web Theatre 
The New Intimacy: rihannaboi95 and Web Theatre 
Reconsidering Display in Online Testimonial Advertising: The “Show Faces” Feature in Facebook’s Social Pl

©2014 Project MUSE. Produced by The Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Milton S. Eisenhower Library.