Practical Gardening
1963
Jan p9
no soil - pliable, synthetic growth medium. polyurethane impregnated with plant nutrients. 

Jan p19 worms in lawn - after mowrah meal - use either sulphate of ammonia or a lawn sand dressing in spring. 

Jan p37 Plant Doctore Dr David Hessayon
harnessing hormones. medical ring, think of yuman and animal preps which must be handled with care. Raises question of safety  of handling plant hormones. Fort unrelated and no similarity to each other. Dealing with products where are among the safe test of all gardening chems and there is no risk at all of producing the odd effects of human hormones. Risk to plant life. change whole growth pattern, essential to follwe instructions. do not overdose. Rooting hormones, fruit drop preventing, fruit setting, weed killing, growth retarding

no adverts for chems.
-------------
MArch 
fumigation advert 
crystanth food kills pests as you feed
Tudor insecticide spray
dicotox weedkiller
welgro and sling pack sprayer

april
p4 murphy chem co
p6 fisons fairwary

p10 Reckitt's Thrive fertiliser - did nnot know they did frets
p11 killaspray/ twistakil
p14 feed and weed
p17 phostrogen no smell no trouble
p30 sod chlorate to kill bindweed
p34 velvas green with envy ad non-user
p78 Turfex 
p85 Spray em - ppl - pests
p93 sprayers - man and womanp
96 supertox, dicotox 

---------
may much the same

----------
june
excellent Dad says you're soppy ad for insectcide
p13 looking ahead - wee free star berries - experiments continued with new residual herbicide tested during last 2 yrs on starwbs and peas. Chloroxuron without damage to crops. 

p17
chemical free product - liquid ferts which do not contain chems and do not contain slaughter house, fish or poultry waste (vegetarian) G Walker Walsall Staffs
Chemical free animal product free fertiliser in liquid form is Maxicrop, available form local garden shop. Liquified seaweed.  
slime on paths - Mrs Mc Lean Fife Scotland. Bordeaux powder, or household bleach

p20
weed control prospers  - Looking ahead referred to chem weed control instead of cultivation. Is anything available yet? HJ Goss, Cardiff
number of weedkillers available to prof soft fuit grower such as simazine, diquat and paraquat. At the present time these products are not available to the amateur gardener in small packs but we belie within a ur or 2 soft fruit selective herbicie will be seen in garden shops. We shall certainly announce its arrival in PG!

p28 variety of synchemicals products - weedkillers
p31 REckitts sprays
p52-53 Get a better lawn RB Dawson 
p65 War on weeds 0 illustrated
p86 Murphy chemicals insecticides full page ad, write in for chart
p90 DDT and pyrethrum

-----------
july - not so much 

-----------
august
only copying the thing about plastic bags and vacuum cleaner dirt for hist-tech purposes. 
more on polythene p 11 - lining seed boxes with polythene in substitute of crocks= black best, then green, but even with white better results than unlined. MRs B Lee from leamington Spa.

p13 weeds below hedge. please advise what to spray. HL Wallace, Newtownards N Ireland
unfortunately no weedkiller which you could safely use right up to the hedge. weeded can be used close to established trees, but a hallow rooting hedge could be damaged. Careful use of flame gun otherwise it must be the hoe. 

----------

sept
bemoaning high price of garden chems (p3) Stan russell over the fence. Of no consequence, didn't go any further. 
p7 - poisons - plant poisons only. emetic 
inside back cover - flame gun advert
-------

oct
p60 fisons weeded - look ahead to next year's garden
handy hints p70 dissolve coarse salt alb in gallon of hot water - cheap and effective weedkiller for paths, keeps weeds down 2-3 months

--------\
nov
p11 growth retardant spray for privet and evergreen we head now of a similar product for treating lawns. may reach Britain shortly (from the Continent)

p25 Killing seedling weeds - I have heard that a product has been introduced that kills seeds of weeds in the soil before germination. Could you let me know its name and that of the makers? PM Norwell-Smith, Leicester. There is no product that spacifically kills the seeds of weeds. However there are products which kill germinating weed seeds before the crop emerges. An e.g. is Herbon Garden Herbicide, from Herbon Litd Landford Salibury Wilts. 

------
dec 

p17 Looking ahead: expect more frequent news about new chems for gardening use. Ambac - the association of british manufacturers of ag chemo has appointed a full time info officer to bring gardeners up to date with debs. Makers of fee, weed and pest killers have been shot at recently from variou squatters and this move could help to show that particularly so far as gardeners are concerned they do far more good than harm.  

chemicals do not feature in gift guide
---------
march - 
p17 poisons - plant poisons esp children - avoid poppy laburnum, monkshood, larkspur, delphinium, fox glove, thorn apple, laurel, yew, pricet and snowberry. 

p44 experiments at Longleat Gardens to destroy weeds without chem weedkillers. Success with black polythene - if weediest piece can be spared or a season. 

-----------
april editorial p3

p13 looking ahead first aid bar
p43 dosage chart
p88 don't risk killers - hormone weedkillers in lawn - delay
p92 Velvas lawn sand

-------
may 
editorial p3
p43 lighter fuel bottle for weedkiller
p42 simazine
105 reckitts - see the A symbol

------
june
reader survey - find out more, free trowels for the first 500 to respond
p15 lawn sand risk - mercerised lawn sand to kill moss, will it harm 3yr old bush apple trees
can use to kill moss in the grass under your apple trees wo any risk of damaging trees. 
p17 weedkiller wanted - EJ Cooper SEaview IoW please give details of any weedkiller which is harmless to shrubs and lens. I have a large are of crazy paving, paths and drives to keep free from weeds. No weedkillers guar netted to be harmless to both shrubs and lawns. Sod chlorate often used as total plant killer on paths and fires and a safer produce is WEedex. However, both must be kept wary from lawn and garden plants. 
p19 weed problem - speedwell selective weedkiller no good. R Reddy Kent, Speedwell increasing menace. Conintual clearing and hoeing is all you can do in the flower border. Hormone weedkillers are not effective in lawns. Lawn sand is more successful and this will do a good burning out job if applied now that the grass is growing well.

p31 Berk chemicals touch weeder
p73 pbi medipacks 

--------july
destroy bind weed  p26 

