p iii
complex symbiotic relationship between the press and political belifs
newspapers lacked agency to mould new political idoogies or to reshape party political world views. highlight influential in fuelling, sharpening and redefining readers preexsting political outlooks and assimilating recent developments in to a particular partisan viewpoint. 
press provided arguments to reply in (political) discussions and debates 
Londoners turned to those publications whose political leanings and portrays matched their own and which they found congenial and entertaining. 

piv
diarist feared less well educated and wealthy than themselves susceptible to brainwashing, vulnerable to duping 

Who are some interesting press historians?

Jeremy Black - seems to write on everything
Michael Harris
also Journal of newspaper and periodical history
Bob Harris

Habaermas - structural transformation of the public sphere - forum for rational-critical debate newspapers as two way conduit that informed and reflected public opinion. (p4 in thesis)

Hannah Barker - up to 1850s

Sommerville - proliferation of periodical publications after 1695 extinguished debate, people passively absorbed newspaper content that told them what to think on a daily basis. This gave political press near totalitarian agency<< criticised by British historians and contradicted by the existence of reader responses. 

Takes care to say what the limitations of newspapers are
risk of prioritising newspaper over other forms of mews media
overlooks recorded experiences of genuine readers
but one form of news media e.g. oral culture

method of focusing on text rather than reader - simplify the complexities of the reading proces

Kathleen Wilson - political impact of the press in terms of capacity 'to organise knowledge, shape expectations, mobilise identities and proffer ideals, perspectives and attitudes through which politics could be interpreted. 

Bb Harris press helped to provide a common framework and vocabulary for public political debate 

This is less moulding but creating climates facilitating intpretation 

Richard Hoggart - sociologist, studio 1950s english working class reception of mass culture  cited in Chartier, Texts and see also Cultural Origins.  - - BL


There is also History of Reading, as well as of newspapers...

Milner, Andrew - literature, culture and society


UGL PN5114 NEW 1978  Newspaper history Boyce et al
UGL PN5154 JON 1993  Journalism in wales
LGL 	(UBHU) 247937 d.828  newspapers in ireland
LGL 	(UBHU) 247937 e.335 journalism to the present day
Social science library PN5118.ABR 1966 education class reading newspapers
										PN5118.ABR 1963
social science library HX241.5.FAB press and the public


