Questions with Peter Young

We met up for a chat July 30, 2015 at Chats Palace in Homerton.

Peter started off by telling me about Chat's Palace, which was the old library (it is a lovely light building, the roof is all glass. The room we were in was the old silk screen printing room, indicated by the colourful splashes of old ink on the floor.). It's been a community arts centre since the 1970s, council, London GLC funding, even exhibitions sponsored by BP he's seen their logo and name on exhibition posters, which he thought was strange as they'd have rather not done anything than taken BP's money. There was always a darkroom, there was a lot of documentary photography of the Palace's activities, mainly theatre, big Christmas shows. Very lo-fi exhibitions, where people would stick pictures up with a drawing pin. He joined in 2002, when people had not made a success of leasing out the dark room and digital had really been taken up. There were skips full of dark room equipment from all the professional photography studios in London. There was no technical manager and everything was as broken as it could be. He set up the dark room again from scratch. He noted that from 2006 the number of offers of donations he got really dried up, as people saw value in analogue equipment again.

On magic:
	Peter finds this a cliche, never personally obsessed with this, though has seen other people get very excited about this.  He prefers the depth and tone of the black available, and the colours more true to the world than the super-sharp and bright digital images. 

On chemical hazards: 
	Peter was generally aware of hazards associated with chemicals since he started processing in the 1980s, running this  darkroom to health and safety standards means that he is particularly aware of them. Some darkrooms are run on a sort of youth hostel approach, people given the key and told to tidy up after themselves. He avoids raw powders, preferring to buy concentrates and dilute them for the Users of this darkroom, he also does all the clearing up. He prefers to keep chemical impact as limited as possible. He doesn't use a stop bath, he switched from a stop bath to just water without telling anyone and it didn't make a difference really, had to change fixer more often as developer carried over, but stop bath was the most smelly. Chooses the colour chemicals with least environmental impact. All protective equipment is offered at Chats. Gloves are used, even if long term effects are questionable, chemicals can get in around nail beds and really sting. Would ban the "certain type of artistic person who wants to put their hands in chemicals and feel a more organic connection with their work" from the dark room.  Peter mentioned a photo that he saw when he was working through the Chat Palace archives of a photography workshop with disabled children, where people were having tea next to people mixing up chemicals. This would never happen now, food and drink are banned from the darkroom, strictly separated areas. Related anecdote of lab technicians in a national newspaper all smoking in the darkroom, they would use smoke to dodge (block light from portions), very skilled. No chemicals are actually flammable, but it is bad practice for cleanliness, transfer of chemicals.

When Peter arrived at this darkroom in 2002, probably the lowest point of analogue photography, at the invitation of one of the directors /board members(?) who he knew, the darkroom was dilapidated, everything was broken, it was a horror, all the chemicals were out of date. 
	What happens when chemicals are out of date?
They're unpredictable, they won't mix, won't dilute properly. Had to get rid of everything and start again. 
	Discussed bulging tins at MOSI.
If you produce 200L waste chemicals per year from a site you have to register and get waste treated professionally. Amateurs in their loft or garage are unlikely to produce this amount and can just dispose down the sink. They're having an issue at the moment as the place that they store the chemicals before being taken away is being redeveloped. Waste Care International - disposal.
 	[find out when this level was implemented]

Why do people use this dark room? 
	Space, living in shoebox flats, when Peter was living in his flat in Bournemouth it was two hours to put together his darkroom and to pack it up again, a palaver. People don't have the space. Community darkrooms also allow people to buy into professionalism, expertise and to meet with other likeminded people enthusiasts. Music photographer who'd become well known with NME then moved out to New York had come back to London and felt out of touch - Chats Palace was a way of getting back in touch. Lots of European people, especially women Italians, Germans, Spanish, working hard at shitty jobs and trying to understand London through taking black and white photographs. They have a colour darkroom here too, which is quite unusual. Economy, buying all the materials is pretty expensive. When the world market price of silver rocketed, prices of black and white paper stayed high even after the price of silver dropped.  People can access better equipment here, as well as buy into the knowledge and support. 
	
		People travel a long way to use the dark room, a man from Oxford comes on the coach, a woman from Coventry, a woman from Berlin books week long blocks. Public access darkrooms are few and far between, yes London is quite a unique place for this type of facility. Was researching locations and didn't find any in Manchester outside of university provisions, a couple in Bristol and some in inexplicably small or out of the way locations run by enthusiasts. Maker labs seem to be fulfilling this type of role now, not so closely related to council funding. 
	
Why are people using analogue processes now?
	So much digital in the rest of their lives. Professional photographers who moved to digital are moving back to digital because they can limit the amount of work, instead of spending all night manipulating images on the screen. People can't bear to turn on the computer again. Then there's a retro thing, very East London, everybody had an analogue camera around their necks at one point. 

Accessing materials:
	Previously, amateurs just had to go along with whatever suppliers offered, now suppliers are making products particularly for amateurs. Process Supplies in Mount Pleasant (oldest photographic suppliers in London, more of a trade counter for pros) would have humiliated amateurs who didn't know what they wanted, now they're very friendly. They're based on more of a warehouse system, they have a counter at the front and people disappear off behind to get things. Silverpoint have a shop that you can look round. [My experience in Fred Aldous of chems etc behind the till seems unusual]
	
Didn't think it was particularly hard to get hold of the chemicals, could walk into any local camera shop in Bournemouth in the 80s and get concentrates, probably in 1 litre amounts which would last ages. Now the internet can allow you to get pretty much anything. Tells about how one of the guys at Process Supplies scoured Eastern Europe for interesting papers, factories that still had their own machines, imported lots of products to the UK. 

	The idea of product removal quite traumatic at one time, but there's less panic over it now.  Ilford had a faulty batch of paper which they had to recall, leading to a shortage, everyone thought it would be the end of Ilford but it wasn't. They were bought out by middleman, now known as Ilford-Harmon.

Learning about photography:
	When Peter was learning, he learned with his mate who was probably a bit further along and who already had some of the chemicals. Learned from books - Langford, really good books, very easy to do really. 
	Did HND photography to professionalise his interest in photography as a mature student before he started at Chats
	(previously studied politics at Manchester Poly)

Alternatives to commercial products:
	Not something he has ever personally been particularly interested in, not a process person, very much follows the instructions given on the chemicals, not a tweaker or experimenter (although he did experiment with removing the stop bath and replacing it with water). 
	
We discussed changes in Manchester, the disappearance of buildings like the BBC on Oxford Rd, how Peter remembered these wastelands with pubs or  a single building sitting in the middle of them from when he was living there. He's been doing a lot of photography around Soho recently because of the changes going on there, this is what photo documentary is for.
