Questions for Paul Carter

A lot of photographers use the word ‘magic’ when talking about seeing an image come up during developing. What is the state of magical moments in digital photography now? Would you say that chemical magic is special or different to other kinds of technological magic? It’s pretty amazing photographers can make and manipulate images with electronics, silicon and software, but photographers' relationships to wet, odiferous chemicals and paper is I suspect different.

You travelled widely both with your family and as an independent adult. Could you comment on whether there were any national or indeed regional differences in getting developing chemicals or attitudes to processing one’s own images? 

The magazines and books I’ve been using as sources seem to give quite a lot of mail order addresses for amateur photography supplies. What would you say was the usual way of obtaining chemicals? I’m thinking about retailing and shopping trends, and how they affected photographers, such as personal contact and discussion with a salesperson (either face to face or through correspondence), self service from a shelf (or was this not even an option?), choosing from a catalogue list, the influence of magazines hints shared through letter pages, how to’s and product reviews.  I think  you probably have a number of view points on this, as a user as well as through working on Photo News Weekly.

Was there much difference between supplies badged up as amateur and those for professionals, other than volume or quantity, and did this cause any problems?

Did you think developing chemicals in any form or any particular ones, became hard/er to get, and if so, what did you perceive as being the reasons? It is hard to disentangle supply and demand, so getting a personal perspective from you as a user would be interesting. 

In one of Jo Spence’s books she mentioned that members of the Photography Workshop was trying to find alternatives to commercial products, to get away from monopolistic companies. Was this a minority view or one that might have been more commonplace, albeit in a more nuanced way? Anxiety that a company could pull a preferred product at any time for some reason, that they may or may not explain?

From my reading, I get the impression that in Britain at least chemical safety and the health of the photographer was less important than getting good images. By taking common sense precautions that guaranteed decent results, the health of the photographer was also safeguarded, but almost as a secondary effect. Was toxicity, allergy, or unknown effects much of a consideration to you when you were doing chemical processing? Could you describe any general trends in awareness, concern or willingness to engage with chemicals that you noticed as a practitioner or as an editor?

You were planning on a travelling photography project, which involved the conversion of a camper van into a darkroom. Living in close proximity to work seems to be a particular trend among photographers. 

In the 1980s books started being published about hazards of photographic chemicals, although many of the more dangerous chemicals had already been substituted. Were chemical hazards something that bothered you? Where do you think the anxiety behind these books came from and do you think they had any effects on British users? 