p140
points at which households were able to gain the benefits of developments in sanitation depended on their housing history, with occasional small margins for personal voice. Among the elderly, old habits sometimes died hard, and it was known for them to prefer to use an outside toilet, considering it more decent even when an inside one was available. People in general tended to dislike the placing of the WC in the bathroom M-O 1943, or the location of downstairs WCs too close to the front doors or kitchens which they found embarrassing. Overall the diffusion of the WC was slow and patchy, the decade of most progress was 1951-61 when the number of households sharing a closet was more than halved, but many people had no chase to experience up to date sanitation until well after the middle of the century. In 1971 10% households still had to use an outside WC and not until the 80s that those lacking any access to a flush toilet fell to negligee proportions. People unable to keep homes of their own were the slowest to gain from rising standards. 

p142
Broadcasting battery radio 1922, 90% homes had a wireless by 1939. 
TV started 1937 but suspended for war. Resumed and especially for 1953 coronation hire / purchase of sets spread rapidly, reaching more than 90% homes within 20 years. 

p120
stench of poor homes associated with disease but in better off homes there were plenty of things to cause stuffiness and smell: soot and coal dust, oil and gas lamps, untapped waste pipes, and heavily polluted external environment. 
many things to eliminate smells - more frequently washed bodies and the end of greasy cooking - the lbockin or elimination of open fires and superior insulation brought the problems of ventilation back. Vermin also solved, then returned later. 1956 Central Housing Advisory Committee noted the incidence of bed bugs in slum houses is nowadays far less than was experience before the war and disinfestation was discriminatory and embarrassing. Diplomatic way round the problem ould be treatment for woodworm - no stickman and it should not be carried into new homes. Making this the reason for disinfestation would make the process more acceptable. 

Between the wars all that most suburban house knew of vermin were mice, bluebottle sand flies, long sticky ribbons of flypapers were normal. 1951 Festival mounted a giant sized and memorable exhibit on the disgusting habits of the house fly and there followed a period when people's zealous use of DDT sprays led to its virtual disappearance. p121 Parker Morris Report 1961 found domestic vermin not worthy  of mentioned. But rats, ants , pigeons became troublesome in high density environments .

household refuse - haphazard. council housing of 1940s first to incorporate bin stores . volume growing but weight fallen about 10% in early 60s - mostly decrease in ash and rise in paper packaging. 

p176
Vicorian suburban tradition has proved more influential, the vernacular tradition has persisted and both have left a clearly identifiable legacy to the modern domestic garden. 
19C working class experience of gardening  - particularly well established in areas which experienced the 1st stage of industrialisation in the 18thC. Level of expertise so high that the cultivation of particular plants or produce became associated w specific regions - gooseberries in Mcr, pinks in Glasgow and panses among Derbyshire miners. Hoyles 1991

tradition of planting veg, fruit and flowers in one plot extended to urban setting through allotments. Use of allotments esp associated with necessity -growing, to supplement income of working class households. Moral benefits vigoriously promoted in Vicotran period. 

p177
active gardening complemented the virtues of hard work and industry , of self reliance and self improvement (Gaskell 1980. It was a respectable and rational recreation. 

Octabia Hill housing reformer active in provision of garden and open spaces. 
Bournville - George Cabury - garden maintenance was a condition of lease and tenancy agreement. Gardens dug over and hedges, creepers and fruit trees planted before houses were occupied. Port Sunlight provided a more normal arrangement t for the time of small backyards, supplemented by common allotments. 
Majoirty of working classes, privately renewed terraced housing made access to garden space inconceivable. Birminhap was an exception - long tradition of gardening led to the provision of gardens in up to 1/3 19C dwellings (Bournvill Village Trust) back yard could be transformed. East End of London, such practices were legendary and theiving in the 50s. . Back gardens of man old houses filled with masses of flowers, sometimes hen runs, rabbit hutches and aviaries. Prize dahlias and shed in which shoes or furniture was repaired. Garden space available was not indicative of preference for gardens or widespread belief in social benefits. 

p178
1919 - under provision of gardens was addressed. 
negative status of back yard - concentration of service functions, crated a barrier to making a garden here. Progressive incorporation into the interior freed up the space for developing a private garden. 
p180
by 1914 mid class garden - carefully ordered and compact, decorative, designed for family leisure in a private setting. Recreational use of the garden dependent on the employment of a jobbing gardener and the control exercised over mana nd nature appealed to a class anxious to consolidate position in society. Gardening and become an established mid class activity and a private garden was both a functional and symbolic addition to the suburban home. 


p198
what was accomplished in the 20C was the almost universal attachment tfo the garden to the home. Not far short of half the adult population now seem to be fairly frequent gardeners, men are more active gardeners than women with a participation rate of 52% (GHS 1992) 
age specific - 59% men aged 60-69 do gardening and continue to keep up high levels of activity above 70
Commonest age for women gardeners is 45-59 but gardening activity low among all people under 30. 

time available for gardening increases with age. Habits and expectation of people who're now elderly formed though their housing experience 50yrs ago. 
p199
connection with affluence - 
acquision of gardens was a leap forward in housing standards. tending the garden became part of the joint conjugal enterprise of improving the home. Not surprising to find it is associated with class, 60+% of precessional men but under 40% unskilled men reported doing some gardening in the previous 4 weeks GHS 1989. 

Less clear what the gardens role will be among the poorest members of society . The peripheral council estate has sen it put to good use of an adventure playground and for takin gold cars apart but for its congenitally approved upkeep the money and skills may be lacking. 

p196
about garages - but nothing about storage of chemicals here other than 'paraphernalia of DIY'

p194
cement - 1960 available in a variety of forms. Stepping stones or slabs overcame the problem o fhb edewey lawn. Paterrened blocks = screens or walls. Confimed direction of changes to garden design. Patio - style of garden introduced from Spain, influenced by the new package holiday experience. This marked the clarets break with traditional English domestic garden, encapsulated new relationship between home and garden. 
1969 'gardens are now for people, even for people who do not always enjoy gardening' The small garden could function as an extension iof the too-small house as a room outside, and the small suefl garden should be designed as one might design a room' Brookes 1969 p5

could incorporate sandpit, bbq, drying area, instantly planted with containers, made private with fence panels. Patio door minimised boundary between it and  house. 

garden centre - cheap plastic sna car ownership. 
cheap electric motors + plastics = lawnmower lightweight
ever increasing range of sundries and during 60s almost all nurseures added a garden cent. Small and patio style back gardens sustain dby a constantly growing range of garden centre products. Grow-bags, hanging baskets and Flymo made gardening more manageable. Garden furniture on firmed primacy of leisure function. 

p188
Central Housing Adivosry Committee - most gardens admirably kept ' garden was a new toy of which they were obi proud' Min of Health 1938 

2/3 gardens well cultivated, 1/3 partially cultivated and only about 7% neglected though valued as private space 1945 Mc Allister and McAllister

p190
garden size in post war developments were governed by the prescriptions for popn densities of town and country planning. Variable, depending on distance form utan centre. In council housing plot size depended on location and layout, 12 houses to an acre was abandoned. 
This rand counter to strongly expressed wish for gardens and function now generally thought desirable. Min size was a plot o 800sqyd, still easily within the range of one person's spare time maintaence  (EAW 1946)

desire to create home centred daily life after disruption of war
back garden as extension of home. 
place where children can play father can dig and baby can sleep Halton 1943 p270
should be a close reship between garden and house with French windows and a folding door transforming the living room in simmer. Garden began to be desired as outdoor room. 
Demands of large prewar back gardens were perhaps beginning to be onerous. 1951 report that11% council house plots derelict, and fruit ad  veg growing were in decline. 
p191
reworking of labour saving garden Streeter 56
planting that did not require replacement each season, taie advantage of garden chems, aids and gadgets, and by changes in garden design. 
Jellicoes' minimum garden Festival of Britain. flower box, pots, bamboo trellis and concrete paving. Led to emergence of distinctive style of small scale English gardening, 

p192
new emphasis on labour saving or leisure garden Genders 59
means that necessity growing had to be scarified. Back gardens could still incorporate decorative flower growing, but increasingly their main use was that of an open air room Whittick 1957
Within 30yrs of making back gardens large enough to grow produce available to most families the practice was abandoned. Mid 60s, perceived affluence had taken necessity out of necessity growing. 

p193
growing pro due was acrified but new paraphernalia of leisure required space to store caravans, boats etc. 
late 60s consistent view of adequate garden size is found. 
gardens less than 800ft sw were too small 
1968 opinion poll found that 88% preferred a private garden of 900ft rather than a smaller garden with a communal addition. 

user studies - privacy noise problems, not enough space for drying clothes or for children to play. 

mid 60s changes in plot size and garden use had taken over the interwar concept of the zoned garden. In new homes space for drying clothes, flowers, play and sitting out had to be integrated into one area. 

p186 - zoned to accommodate lawn, flowerbed next to house with a veg plot and fruit bushes beyond. Experience of wartime necessity growing, costs of employing a gardener and an emphasis on fresh air for health encouraged more active gardening and fruit and beg brouging. Shift away from passive (decorative) suburban gardening confined by 1939
p187
 survey that only 3 gardens out of each 100 was the work done by a paid gardener. Wibberly 1959.
 New suburbia gardening done by husband and wife, enjoyed by whole family. Not too onerous and labour saint garden went hand in ahdn with reviveal of active gardening. Achieved through easily manageable lawn, rock gardena dn rosebuds, increased use of gadgetry (lawn making quit, hoses, sprinklers, weedkillers pest and fert). 