Maguire, Robert

end of interview most likely - comments on scrupulous housekeeping

27.00 by half past ten when she went out shopping, she had actually polished all the floors in the house and dusted, that was her routine, daily! it was amazing. It was scrupulously tidy, lino floors of course, just a few little rugs, it was all spotless and shiny. 

Betty Sffill
Left home at 13, nanny in Blackpool, 4s a week. 3s sent home, 3?d stamp and envelope for mother to send back saying she'd received money. Had 6d a week to spend. Enjoyed work. Became a cook in Cleveleys - brought up to do housework, bake bread. Joined steel works after domestic service.  See more at: https://sounds.bl.uk/Oral-history/Industry-water-steel-and-energy/021M-C0532X0043XX-0001V0#sthash.FCT1qzRN.dpuf

Mcdonald, Edna
One boy had his birthday Nov. 5th, always went to his birthday party - lots of food 'we didn't get', fireworks. Housework. Left school and went to Morecambe as a domestic for a dentist. Slave to her - not a nice person. Ironing, washing, cleaning, polishing - everything but cook. Very strict, paid 8s a week, sent 5s home to parents. Go skating with friends and go to pictures. Stayed for 9 months, parents came for me as so unhappy. Lost some hair, working all the time. One Sunday a month off, one night a week off. Very hard work. Aunt got me a job in a cafe in Blackpool, 1s tips. Later got job in golf club in Wakefield, owned by Peter Aliss' parents. Took Peter out when he was a child. At Keswick, got job as hotel waitress. Farmers would leave 10s tips, high class. Always different people, learning all the time. Lived in hotel. Staff meals, housekeeper and chauffeur top of table. Nobody did anybody else's job, very rigid. Gentry did not look down on you. - See more at: https://sounds.bl.uk/Oral-history/Industry-water-steel-and-energy/021M-C0532X0041XX-0001V0#sthash.p0wf4JZ2.dpuf
mother had never gone out to work when husband died, got 10s pension wasn't full pension, steel works give her a job. steel works looked after the widows the best the could. cleaned the offices. 
1411 routine - do all the housework, did a lot at home. I used to work away when I left school, to Morecambe to a dentist house. Got it from the labour exchange. As a maid, a slave really. Do everything. Ironed, washed, cleaned, polished, everything but cook. too young to cook. very strict, not happy at all there. send 5s home, keep 3, save 1, cinema, skate round morecambe promenade in the winter. Got alopecia. Not contagious, but mistress wouldn't let me sit on the chair, special pillow cases etc. 


Ann Stokes
end of interview
IA and AS' shared housework and cooking routine. Mentions afternoon rests and importance of "space to think". - See more at: https://sounds.bl.uk/Oral-history/Crafts/021M-C0960X0013XX-0011V0#sthash.KPDTNqe3.dpuf

11 of 17 27min - Ian does everything, cooks, caters, makes a difference from writing all the time. 

Joan Pilsbury 
JP’s father not coming to wedding but giving cheque from £100 which was spent on a carpet from John Lewis where JP’s Uncle Ted a buyer . Neil (NT) and JP moving into a regency house in Twickenham; going to Teesdale on honeymoon. JP returning and realising she was responsible for doing the cooking; JP not having done cooking until KP went into hospital. Comments on housekeeping; NT and JP doing housework together; NT encouraging JP to work. [53:01] JP ending up doing majority of cooking and cooking for KP as well; JP preferring housework to cooking. NT used to doing housework from being in army. JP and NT decorating in the evenings; liking cool colours and lots of light. NT collecting Georgian glass from Porto - See more at: https://sounds.bl.uk/Oral-history/Crafts/021M-C0960X0121XX-0003V0#sthash.WhWhDxbm.dpuf
51 - he was very handy around the house
he'd had his own flat in london
how involved had you been - in cooking? not at all, until mother went into hospital and I could have a much tidier house if I did it, so when she was safely out of the way I did it. 
I did the minimum, it was a tiny house, but my mother was one for never putting one away in case she needede it later so things piled up. Hall carpet always dusty. We did houseowrk together, he was not at all unhandy, very resourceful and practical. I was busy working anyway, get upstairs to the studio woman we need some money! we didn't divide chores, we just did it as it happened. saveing time where I could, cutting corners. rather housework than cook any day. Just to feel it's in order, but not washing china ornaments or anything like that. Neil always ready to turn his hand to it. Busy sweeping the kitchen floor with Izal, used to looking after himself after the army and his own flat. Felt ready to be apologetic for things  [housework] she felt she should have done. 




Rosemary Wren
Beginning only 
my notes
4 of 7, 28:15 after a time I was supposed to help with the housework on saturday morning, I never found it very interesting. the trouble was my mother had escaped from being the kind of wife that did nothing but domestic things [mother was a potter/artist] she didn't want me to get trapped in that sort of situation so I just found dusting boring, cleaning tables and things, I did it if pushed my  father - that girl will never get married if she doesn't get more domesticated and learn to clean things properly - of course I found Peter, who just loves cleaning and thinks I don't do it properly anyway so that's worked out very well.
Had a girl who came to do basic cleaning and look after her. Given something to do, like a book or something, went to exhibitions for instance. 
 Description of Alice Brown who looked after RW and the housework. See more at: https://sounds.bl.uk/Oral-history/Crafts/021M-C0960X0050XX-0004V0#sthash.sefoJiNe.dpuf

Dubsky Barbara
End of interview - Parents worked 12 hours a day. Worked while waiting for term to start and was paid by them. They lived with friends. The 3 parents did all cooking and housework before the Grandmother came in 1946. Father made fish dish learned in Hvar. - See more at: https://sounds.bl.uk/Oral-history/Jewish-Holocaust-survivors/021M-C0410X0175XX-0007V0#sthash.n0JCOSUU.dpuf

Mary Wondraush
[32:20] Comments on working like a labourer in the garden. Remarks on not doing housework. Remarks on MW’s children wearing beautiful clothes, comments on MW designing her own clothes. [36:06] - See more at: https://sounds.bl.uk/Oral-history/Crafts/021M-C0960X0077XX-0007V0#sthash.C3pJwiCU.dpuf

had a twin tub, someone came twice a week, wasn't something I thought about, washing. Describes not putting all clothes after one day's wear in the machine. Not been a big thing in my life. 

irwin flavia
towards beginning? 
Adults' attitudes to children at the time. Northern hospitality. FI's social life. Housework and help. - See more at: https://sounds.bl.uk/Arts-literature-and-performance/Art-photography-and-architecture/021M-C0466X0125XX-0900V0#sthash.AkwTNqeb.dpuf
Mrs Brown in once a week for laundry (all by hand), clean the house. Had to leave cooking to Roger. Didn't have to get up pre-dawn or anything, so near work. Roger left at quarter to nine, very easy, relaxed. Occasionally, perhaps more than occasionally he came back for lunch. I would in the morning have gone out either food or shopping in some form. Had lunch, children either rested before or after and I had tme to do some reading. But, I used to take them out for walks in parks in the afternoon and I did a lot of drawing...

Ken Taylor
track 2 of 2 6 mins wood resin all over hands, wouldn't come off, sticky. washing washing and washing. we bought this jelly stuff for ourselves and put that on then washed it off and it would come off alright after that. Be all over our clothes, black and sticky.

hard work being a wife of a docker, good job washing machines came in
had to change outside the house, in the shed like. 


Pauline Burbidge
38 dealing with fire cleaning/laying big part of childhood. (no products mentioned)
young child, kitchen utensils were all basic, wooden brown. I remember very distinctly when I was 6 or 7 plastic hit the farm kitchen, suddenly there'ed eb lots of bright coloured plastics. mugs, melamine, remember on one occasion we were sitting by the fire keeping warm, the fire grate had two saucepan holders, metal, plastic has arrived int the kitchen we had our mugs of tea on plastic and put the next to the fire, these plastic cups were just melting with hot tea in them. Quite a mess. I think parents just laughed it off.  