ways of regulating

Harry Marks

FDA only regulates drug labelling, not prescription. through pressuring pharmaceutical companies to label their drugs accurately, that they uphold the claims made about them, the FDA try to exert influence on the doctors who prescribe them, so that patients are treated successfully and safely. 

Emphasis is on responsibility of doctor, their training, knowledge and view of the individual patient - professional autonomy.

Marks points out that some doctors will always misprescribe, and in some cases this can be seen as experimental and successfully treating diseases that were not the target of the drug, or finding improved or new uses for a drug, but in the majority of cases this is reprehensible behaviour which puts the patient at risk, especially when it takes place after adverse effects have been identified and publicised. 

p101
"are th effects noted "truly" a product of the drug or of unusual circumstances (individual sensitivity and/or inappropriate usage)?"
p102
"given the consistent evidence that many physicians ignore drug warnings and frequently use drugs without regard to their approved indications, such deference to professional autonomy seem indefensible. Limited to written directives transmitted through labelling changes, medical alerts and other forms of informational management - these are the only ways, other than completely withdrawing a drug from the market - that the FDA can alter a physician's behaviour.



Making risks visible did not examine the role or responsibility of the patient in interpreting the labelling, which we can assume is available to them as well in the form of inserts. However, they trust the doctor's expertise in these situations, although the rise of the informed patient who attempts to guide their doctors prescriptions was not addressed in this newly published, but historical article. >> note points to Lara Marks oral contraceptives focus on warning patients, not physicians. 

Where the patient was considered, it was after they had been adversely affected by the drug, and been included on a registry or possibly joined a society that would then act as a formal register = surveillance systems, ad hoc, not necessarily stable as disintegrate when funding, interest or personnel move on. Use of computers to record information, but not uniformly applied system. 