ROSPA at home

Why don't we prevent accidents?
Hugh Jackson
....
Four main groups of people are involved.
The medical profession is in the best position to find out the facts
about the incidence of different types of accidents and their long- and
short-term effects, but it has done too little in the past. The Medical
Commission on Accident Prevention (MCAP) has produced reports
on some specific aspects of accidents.1' 14
Official government bodies-The Department of Health and Social
Security, the Home Office, the Department of Prices and Consumer
Protection (DPCP), the Department of the Environment, and the
Departments of Trade and Industry have done much to improve safety,
both generally and that of appliances and clothing. The Health and
Safety Commission is concerned primarily with industrial safety.
Industrial and trade organisations such as the British Standards
Institution, the Building Trades Research Association, the Electrical
Trade Research Association, etc, are concerned with establishing
safety standards as well as implementing them.
Voluntary Organisations, such as the Royal Society for the Prevention
of Accidents (ROSPA), the Consumer's Association, and the National
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC), are more
concerned with education and dissemination of information, though
the Consumer's Association is also concerned with the independent
testing of appliances. The BBC, independent television, the press,
and women's magazines have enormous and insufficiently used
influence in the widespread education of the public in accident
prevention.
The role of some of these organisations often overlaps and their
efforts are not co-ordinated. The DPCP is sponsoring research into
home accidents at all ages, while the DHSS is proposing to inquire
into accidents to children. The DPCP study will examine poisoning
in childhood from domestic products but not from medicinal
products, which will be considered by the DHSS. The collection and
analysis of data on home accidents will suffer from the withdrawal of
the grant to the Medical Research Division of the Health Education
Council.
The MCAP, with its subcommittees on road safety, home safety,
etc, is the main medical body interested in accident prevention, but
much of its attention is now focused on rescue and resuscitation rather
thn on the patterns of accidents. 

Medicine And The Media
Source: The British Medical Journal, Vol. 2, No. 6199 (Nov. 10, 1979), p. 1215
Published by: BMJ
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25437666

^HE MESSAGE THAT advice about safety in the home
A and other preventive measures can best be put across by
the media was hammered home at the annual conference of the
Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) in
Stratford-upon-Avon last week. The two-day meeting?which
otherwise consisted of over-long speeches, a few minutes for
questions, but no discussion?came to life when films were
screened. Accompanying a speech by a fire officer, we had a
World in Action film of a polyurethane-upholstered sofa burning
so rapidly that fire engulfed a room in four and an half minutes.
Next came a horrifyingly realistic Australian film, Hospitals
don't Burn, which showed how a cigarette carelessly thrown
down a laundry chute could demolish a hospital in 31 minutes.
This film is available from RoSPA for ?168, but is not for hire?
one health education officer told me that she would dearly like
to have shown this to nurses, but couldn't afford it.
After a speech about glass we were shown a RoSPA film and
then the excellent World in Action "Shattered Lives". I had
seen this one before, but was just as shocked as ever by the
extent of injuries caused by glass. Some of the home safety
officers at the conference remarked on the effectiveness of these
films and said that their time might more usefully have been
spent seeing the good films that RoSPA have available rather
than listening to so many speeches.
Local radio came up again and again in speeches on the best
way to communicate with mothers and children; radio stations
in Bristol, Birmingham, and Sheffield were mentioned as being
particularly helpful (these were the areas that the speakers came
from). The last, wittiest, and briefest speaker was from the
Daily Mail; she pointed out that a newspaper campaign in her
paper about flameproof nighties had led to legislation.
We were left in no doubt that talk, exhortation, and leaflets
cannot reach such a wide audience with such impact as films,
television, radio, and the press. We should be grateful, I think,
that the media are so effective when helping with health and
safety education.?hw.



Medical News
Source: The British Medical Journal, Vol. 2, No. 6184 (Jul. 28, 1979), pp. 282-283
Published by: BMJ
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25433424

Drowning accidents
Lack of supervision both in and out of the
home is the major indirect cause of drowning
among children aged under 10, according to a
survey of drowning and near drowning
accidents by RoSPA. Saved from Drowning by
Accident analyses the ages of people in drown
ing accidents in 1978, the places where the
accidents happened, and their causes. Among
children, where most accidents occurred at
play, over three-quarters of the victims were
unsupervised by an adult. Among teenagers
drunkenness was an important factor. The
report recommends that where swimming
lessons for younger children have been cut
back they should be reinstated. The report is
available from the Service Department,
RoSPA, Cannon House, The Priory Queens
way, Birmingham B4 6BS, at ?1-95. 

Medical News
Source: British Medical Journal (Clinical Research Edition), Vol. 293, No. 6553 (Oct. 18, 1986), pp.
1032-1033
Published by: BMJ
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/29524884

"Toxic hazards in the home"
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Ac?
cidents (RoSPA) is launching a winter home safety
campaign directed towards preventing accidental
poisoning in the home. RoSPA comments that
most poisonings occur in children of preschool age
and that poisons taken have included "moth balls,
shoe polish, and fire lighters as well as a wide
variety of drugs and chemicals." A guide to
many domestic toxins, including asbestos, lead,
medicines, chemicals, alcohol, plants, and carbon
monoxide, has been prepared for health profes?
sionals and health educators.
Toxic Hazards in the Home is available from:
Home and Leisure Safety Division, RoSPA,
Cannon House, Priory Queensway, Birmingham
B4 6BS and costs ?8. A resource pack which
includes, in addition to the guide, publicity
material and extra information, costs ?9. 


Review: Where Prevention Is Better
Author(s): R. H. Jackson
Review by: R. H. Jackson
Source: British Medical Journal (Clinical Research Edition), Vol. 289, No. 6457 (Dec. 1, 1984), p.
1531

Where prevention is better
Accidents: Causes, Prevention, and Services. Kenneth Stephenson
Cliff. (Pp 301; ?16-95.) Croom Helm. 1984.
Accidents is a useful, informative, but irritating book. Written
from the point of view of an epidemiologist and health administrator it examines accidents and their backgrounds, their prevention, and the services concerned in their early management.
Much of the approach is historical, and the reviews of changes
over the years are well done and erudite. There are many
references to parliament, legislation, and reports and papers from
government departments. This emphasis on the legalistic approach
leads, however, to some imbalance for example, the British
Standards Institution (not Institute as printed) receives only two
passing mentions. This institution plays an important part in
preparing safety standards and thus in preventing accidents. The
Consumer's Association is also actively concerned with safety and
accident prevention but is not referred to.
In the first section most of the epidemiological information
relates to road accidents, but there is a chapter on agricultural
accidents, a subject in which the author has particular knowledge.
Home accidents are also discussed, but the importance of house
fires and their prevention receives less than its rightful share of
emphasis.
The last chapter in the first section looks at the cost o? accidents,
with particular emphasis on health service costs. In discussing the
problems of assessing health care costs mention is made of the
problem of disability; for the sake of completeness it would have
been useful to mention the World Health Organisation's Inter?
national Classification o? Impairment, Disability, and Handicap
and also to have commented on the problem of the measurement of
the severity of injuries in which the American Abbreviated Injury
Scale is being increasingly used. Nevertheless, a useful list of the
different types of social benefits available is given.
The second section deals with accident prevention, emphasising
the role of education and using the Hampshire road safety
education programme as the main example. There is much
discussion in accident prevention circles about the effectiveness of
education in altering people's behaviour in the short term
compared with the effect of environmental change, and Dr Cliff is
therefore right to discuss in depth the methods of assessing the
effectiveness of programmes of accident prevention. The main
deficiency in this chapter is that there is no reference to the Royal
Society for Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA), whose main thrust is
in education in both road and home safety. Indeed, RoSPA
receives only one cursory mention in the whole book.
