Sarah Pink
in Gender and Consumption

home as site of sensory consumption
p165
Commercial manufactures of domestic products ranging from foods to air fresheners, cleaning product sna soap powders have long recognised the need to attned to the senses. Discussing 'sensory stimulation and consumer capitalism' David Howes cites a 1930s text to comment that even if the visual was the primary sensory mode of consumer culture, the other senses were always important. In fact 'the sense of touch was also appropriated by marketers as a crucial medium of sensory persuasion'. 

While much sensory research into consumer presfresrnces is in product design and envelopment in food it is also applied in other areas. Interdisciplinary empirical evidence and accumulated experise about consumers sensory prefs and practices are applied to product development, market and advertising are key to success in domestic and public contexts. 

see Mallett 2004 for defining concept of home

p166
Miller - the home acts on  our potential as social actors. Home is not simply created through individual's practices. 

Hecht 2001 as a notable exception focusing on smell taste touch and sound in domestic memoies

p169
E shove situates laundry as a form of consumption of not soap powders and fabric conditions, but also domestic services of commodities that are bought, such as water, electricity and heating, to which I would add 'natural resources such as fresh air, which is not purchased as such but accessed via a garden or balcony which would b sacuired through economic exchange. 

p170
doing the laundry is not simply about producing clean items, but about producing ones self and home. Not simply about conforming to norms of cleanliness, but creative process by which individuals reject, accept or stretch conventions, which implicates them as agents in a process of change. 

Not passive consumers of pre packaged artificial smells as Clasen Howes and Synott characterise our practiesce in a post modern age of simulation (1994, 204-205)
People were creative appropriators and mixers of diverse smells in their practices of home creativity and housework. 