Scientific Controversies eds Englehardt and Capstan

Experts
169-202
Garland E Allen in 

descriptive case histories must precede more general theoretical discussions

a debate that is nonepistemic/ nonscientific [people drinking paraquat] cannot really be closed by the resolution of epistemic/ scientific/technical arguments, however powerful. 

In the long run, scientific factors do prevail. In specific situations and specific time periods it is the resolution of the social and political, not the technological and scientific issues that produces closure, no matter how much the controversy itself appears to be epistemic in nature. 
[Do I think this is applicable to paraquat? That people attempt to end lives with chemicals is not the problem of the chemist, suicide and murder are the problems of society even though they use chemicals provided by chemists. Chemists can change the formulation as much as they like but people will still try to kill with it.]

Where is the controversy with paraquat? Is it that it came appeared to be very difficult to treat poisonings? Is it that the numbers were small so couldn't justify withdrawing an effective chemical? Was it the testing methods? 

Controversies are often the focal point for social conflicts that are coming to a head
	- what might the example with paraquat be? agrochemicals and human health?
	- animal testing? 
	- there is not something as strong as special interest groups e.g. eugenicists. 

Media

The role of the mass media in scientific controversy
Rae Goodell
585-597

p586 
amplification of issues that have already attracted interest and involvement from scientists and citizens
occasionally the media contribute significantly to the generation of public isaues
diminution or cessation of media coverage decreases an issues's political urgency

concept of social responsibility has become increasingly salient in media judgements and govt regulation as economic and political conditions have led to a decrease and consolidation of media organisations

informing, not educating
p587
background info about science is distorted - scientist as all-knowing, scientist as eccentric unleasher of damage
conflict and controversy sells papers - was there any conflict in the paraquat story? I don't think so - not in terms of one group /side saying one thing and one side saying another. 
however, controversy often absent - exaggerated expectations, scientists as well-meaning and heroic, science can cure any social problem

p588
Allan Mazur 1981 MEdoa Coverage of Technical Controversies, Journal of Communication 31: 106-15
quantity of media coverage of sic controversy may have more influence on public opinion than its quality. 
Increasein coverage of tech controversy accompanied by increase in public opposition to that technology. Decrease is accompanied by decrease in opposition, regardless to the extent to whig the coverage emphasised risks of danger. 

sensationalising does occur, but infrequently. 
p589 When it does occur, it makes a greater impression than balanced coverage. 

media restrict their attention to certain kinds of information about an issue [e.g. becoming fixated on antidote, without discussing what an antidote truly is], frequently statistical information is given short shrift in media coverage about risk. 

p590 - altered ground rules as stories moves from scientific discussion to public arena - e.g. critics who hold little credibility among scientists receive great attention in the media.  Scientific celebrities community leaders and administrators are asked to comment on a broad range of topics [don't think I've seen a celebrity view on paraquat]

p590 
media assert own values - emphasise human interest, prominent scientists and 2 sided balnce of views. Surprising to extnt coverage reflects values of sic community - little of the compensation ,skepticism and investigation that accompanies political reporting .

emphasise views of certain establish deci spokesmen rather than broader range of expers and lay observers. 
relatively few scientific sources can be seen in case studies of sci issues
info handed out by spokespersons at three mile island was confusing or conflicting, reporters grumbled rather than investigating the reasons for conflicting info, or noting that the confusion was revealing. Celbrity scientists and administrators associated w govt  were cited more frequentl than the people doing the research. 
oversights from relying on provided info - rather than checking with labour and consumer groups (Medsger, Betty 1977 "Asbestos: the California Story" Columbia Journalism Review 16: 41-50)

structures that journalists work in- general writers depend uncritically on sources, lack confidence in own judgement on technical aspects. Writers who exercise independence to conduit investigation are those who free lance (for major magazines). Notirously poorly paid. Wiling to take on in depth reporting are rare. 

This might be to do with dependence on limited number of sources, and lack of competition between science journalists(p592,593)

593
greater diversity of sources is hard to find-  values of sci community discourages scientists from establishing relationships with the press. 



See also 

Basalla, George 1976 Pop Science: The depiction of science in polar culture" in bolton and Blanpied eds Science and Its Public: The changing relationships



