Selling Smells
Scent Home

 I'm really pleased to be here with this work in progress, part of my PhD is called Chemicals and their users in the British home, 1930 to the 1980s. My aim was to treat chemical aids, such as chemical cleaners, stain removers and weedkillers, as technologies and I wanted the work to complement existing studies of mechanical technologies of the home. I was surprised that issues of smell have come up in all the areas that I have researched, but looking back, it was naive to think that it wouldn't. Sheds with containers of fertiliser, slug repellant, weedkillers along with soil have their own distinctive smells and in my case study of paraquat, the absence of smell led to calls for and the subsequent addition of a stenching agent in the agricultural product Gramoxone. Carbon tetrachloride used for removal of greasy stains or even refreshing entire garments, cleaning model railway tracks, and hair pieces, has been described as having a "fascinating" smell, which led to some unfortunate solvent sniffing deaths. Today, I want to look more closely at toilets, sinks and drains, some of the homes' most concerning areas with regard to odours. In the move from buying simple chemicals, such as washing soda crystals, to buying packaged, specialised preparations, there was also a move to products with smells of their own, and scented products. 
 
 We can see from this 1935 market survey carried out on behalf of Reckitts, that soda and soap are rarely used, with most people using a disinfectant, cleanser or scourer. In the reasons for using Harpic, smell is not listed, only that it is a good or satisfactory cleanser, or habit. There are also interesting variations of mixtures or extended methods using sequences of cleanser that people have developed in their own homes. [HAT 50/1/147/3/2/7 Lavatory Cleaner Survey No. 556 7 Jan 1960 p1]
 
Scent communicated that a cleaning action had taken place. Scents communicated that this was not just something you could buy more cheaply in a less designed form. Harpic had been available since XXXX and we can see from this 1950 advert that a new perfumed variant "with fresh fragrance" was being marketed, although the unperformed kind was still available. Adding a scent required modern chemical techniques [The {perfumed} blend has taken a considerable amount of laboratory work to evolve because of the simple fact that there are a very limited number of perfumes which will stand up to the acidity of Harpic HAT SO/1/147/3/2/7, letter to WT Soper, JWalter Thompson from GD Richardson, Reckitt & Sons Ltd, 06.12.66] were employed to scientifically enhance speed or ease the cleaner of the toilet's task, thereby making that user and their home, modern. So, adding a scent was adding value in a number of ways. 

Chlorine, what we can smell in bleach, is very distinctive. Phenol, carbolic acid, originally extracted from coal tar but produced synthetically now. 

Reckitts had been principally sold metal polishes, but realised that as fashions changed in the home reducing the number of surfaces that required this type of care, they had to find new products. In 1924 they made enquiries about buying the Harpic lavatory cleaner business, but it was too pricey. Reckitt's in-house laboratory worked on a formula that allowed them to negotiate a deal with Harpic. The book I worked form didn't go into detail, but I presume that it showed that they could compete with Reckitt's product or that their business secrets were no longer secret so couldn't justify charging that much for the business, or they could sell up. 

The entered the Pharmaceutical trade in 1929, with solid disinfectants and liquid antiseptics. Smell was a keen motivator here, as a pleasant smell would in their words "improve its aesthetic value" [B. Reckit p83]. 

In 1937 Reckitts falsely fathered Sanpic, a household pine disinfectant, under the Suffolk Chemical Company, and sold through grocers. 

Even though a lot of behind the scenes effort went into developing a perfume blend that would stand up to the acidity of Harpic, they did not elaborate on this aspect of the product in their adverts. The senses are directed to the clean visual brightness of the toilet, rather than the smell. The focus is on that deadly S-bend with its lurking germs, where you can't see or reach with a brush. The message is to use Harpic every day, although the adverts claim that all it takes a 5 second sprinkle. Note that this isn't a measurement that you can check in any other way, but is entirely dependent on the product packaging, with the sprinkle cap and the contents determining how much actually comes out. The danger with this type of measurement is that you could use too scant an amount, and the acidity generated wouldn't be enough to break down the germ-hiding limescale. However, daily use  obviously uses up the product faster, so people have to buy more. The fairly big effect of researching this topic actually made me feel very slovenly at first, but I did not change my products, methods or frequency of cleaning my toilet. I wonder what effect this type of slightly scolding, very instructional advert had on potential users of the time. I'm holding out hope for getting some kind of indication on this from either oral history memories, or something in diaries. 

Reckitts also made Dettol, which I found to be ambiguous whether it was for personal use or for cleaning household surfaces, which is why I chose to look at a competitor in the pine scented disinfectant market, Zal. Zal was multi-surface cleaner,  

Compared to the Harpic adverts we looked at, Zal really does hammer home the smell of clean. They explicitly link bad smells to the presence of active, spreading germs. They placed a series of dramatic story adverts in 1955. They are interesting because of their approaches to educating users, through the device of a more Zal-experienced person who doesn't necessarily have to be older, as we can see in this advert where the daughter Linda who uses Zal at work, persuades her mother to use Zal at home. Fairly grown up, engaged Linda is living at home but doesn't make product choices or do the work, which is left to her mother. Once her mother starts using Zal, Linda's embarrassment at the "stuffiness" of the house dissipates and she can bring fiancé Noel to the family home. The mother is relieved and happy, vowing to continue using Zal. 

Stuffiness could be solved by more thorough airing of the house, perhaps cracking open a window. That wouldn't sell very much Zal. Having said that, when were the great smogs? Pollution was high and air quality was poor, so perhaps keeping your window shut and bringing pine fresh smells in to it was the better option if you lived in an urban area. Or stuffiness could have an additional meaning, to hint that the existing cleaning routine was old fashioned. 

Another advert in the series has Jacinth's mother enlighten her about the product, perhaps again showing that the daughter was uninvolved in housework while living at home. Newly wed Jacinth had recently moved into her own home and was faced with husband Derek staying out later and later. During a tearful telephone call to her mother (again, a modern convenience - when did telephones become common?) the older woman suggests the reason for the husband's behaviour. She brings Zal to the house and together cleanse the sink, drains, floors and paintwork - the adverts are careful to list all the places that the product can and should be used - and the daughter is educated by her mother into doing things that she had just not noticed while living at home. Quite a lot of physical work has to go into making the entire house smell pine fresh. 

Here we get to the reason why smelling piney fresh is best - it is because Germs mean smells. "Haven't you noticed?" about being noticed but also about not being able to ones finger on it. 

With the smelly germs banished by Zal, the relationship improved: Derek is always home early now and he praises Jacinth for keeping it fresh and lovely. This is better than not saying anything about it at all. (Another effect of this research led to my efforts feeling very under appreciated.) 

Smelling municipal or medical would be things to avoid in a domestic product, some people associate the overpowering smell of cleaners with illness and sickness, visits to hospitals.  

Perhaps mentioning germs in the context of the toilet is too indelicate, but this is really 

When dealing with threats not visible to the naked eye, an olfactory signal is very helpful. 

smell = care but Conflict with squirting smell to mask/cover - air fresheners?

Not only could products make your home smell fresh, they would improve your relationships.
independent standards - keeping up with the Jones' no longer applicable (Friedan p173)
professionalisation = smell = choosing the right tools for the job (Friedan, p173-4)

in Married to the Mop Jessamyn Neuhaus notes that Suellen Hoy found that products that claimed to clean the air in the home began to multiply in the 1950s

"Growing sensitivity to smells also prompted homemakers to enlist themselves in a "clean fight" against "indoor odours" - household foes that seemed nearly as disturbing and pervasive as germs. Magazine advertisements and television commercials illustrated how unpleasant aromas presented "so many chances to offend". Cooking, bathroom, perspiration, smoking and refrigerator doors were only a few of many that might embarrass or disgust family and friends. Thus "smart" housewives bought an excess of "freshening" products tackled all those jobs nobody liked, and killed unwanted odours." (p202)

Almost every type of housework related product had at one time or another highlighted the elimination of offensive household odours. 

"nothing like the smell of sunshine on clean laundry"
"smelling like a breath of fresh air"

p204
Lysol and other all purpose cleaners and disinfectants made up majority of air freshening products. Though in the late 70s and rapidly growing, the number and variety of air fresheners expanded to today's vast assortment. 

p205

Incensed: Food smells and ethnic tension
Benjamin Aldes Wurgaft
Gastronomica: The Journal of Food and Culture, Vol. 6, No. 2 (Spring 2006), pp. 57-60
p57 history of racisim is full of complaints about the way that a particular group's cooking smells. Xenophobia fuelled by smell-based slurs. 
p59 Jay Geller p211 "The aromatics of jewish difference" in Jews and Other differences: the new jewish cultural studies "Pleasant smells do not exist as part of the urban landscape"
p60 - unlike vision, but like taste, smell is a physical penetration into the body
Smell is more like hearing it its passivity, its nature as a channel of vulnerability, a mechanism by which we both know our environment and know that we are at its mercy. 


 I used to work at the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester, where the gallery Underground Manchester is a perennial favourite especially with young visitors.  For people who have yet to visit, it's a gallery running the length of the basement of the Station Master's House, which charts the domestic health issue of clean water and sewerage, its sponsored by United Utilities. The centre piece is a length of mocked up sewer, complete with stuffed rats and sewer smell (actually "farmyard manure" by Dale Air). Visitors sometimes struggle to find it because as far as they're concerned its The Sewers they're looking for on the museum map, not Underground Manchester. 
 
 There's also a good selection of privies and bathrooms, a noisy tippler toilet and laundry equipment. The subject matter gives a really great range of opportunities for the use of smells, but the convoluted, sometimes hot and stuffy atmosphere can get somewhat claustrophobic and could be sensorily overwhelming. 









 
  
 
 
 
 
