Odor Sensation and Memory
Trygg Engen

references Foul and Fragrant
p2
French govt decided that doors in sox must be eliminated and 'privatisation of human waste and body odour became a matter of public policy. 

Odor perception serves as prototypical sensor for self-reservation agains tportentially harmful substances in the atmosphere and a s a hedonic agent for the enjoyment of fragrances. 

p3
door preferences are learned and that they function because of the memory of associations - premix of this book

plasticity of the sense of smell, effect of early learning

modern civilisation has contributed to the decline of research about odor perception. 

links the increase in environmental pollution (esp diesel) indoors and outdoors, to say that sense of smell is as important or greater than ever. 

smell = assessing the chemical environment. 

p9
odour detection and identification 
nose in constant use, environmental odours must be monitored constantly
used automatically = undervalued

p10
where an odour is smelled is an important factor 
p11
body odour and tobacco smoke, figure prominently in studies of indoor air quality are not universally disliked although generally objectionable. Being with friends at a party where people are smokgin is different from sitting next to a stranger smoking on an airplane. 

p14
smell memories can die out - can this happen in museums, where smells will no long er be recognised and associated with any particularly personal meaning? 
gives example of a smell that his wife recognised from father's vet practice, that he recognised from a tonsillectomy but that it will not be familiar to the next generation because of the development of new anaesthetics. 

p18
the odour of a room becomes less noticeable the longer you're in the room, may seem to disappear altogether
adaptation, fatigue - affects all senses
p19
stronger the prior exposure the high the threshold of sensivity
(e.g. a smoker, exposed to smoke repeatedly, will probably be less sensitive to a room smelling smoky than a nonsmoker)

p28
control over odour - not having control (at least in the case of hypersensitivity to smell  - though I personally think this is probably a reason for using room fresheners) is stressful

p42
Factor determining the response to an door is the extent to which one feels able to control the door. Impt topic in env psychology generally. (Bell, Fishers, Baum and Green 1990)

unknown odour = assumed harmful, especially under relentlessly adverse circus. 
(could using a room freshener be a strategy to homogenise and make a room feel safe?)

p43 odour not rejoiced = perceived as potentially harmful
not related to sensory attributes, but that the source is unknown. 
(sick building syndrome) often involves persistent unidentified odour

Byrne-Clore reinforcement-affect model  1970 - negative influence of degraded environments on interpersonal relationships. A person will be judged less attractive in a smelly, crowded and stuffy atmosphere. 
Ratings of attractiveness found lower if rating s were made in a room pervaded by rancid door of butyric acid (Rotton Barry Frey and Soler 1978)
\
p46 
sources of malodour
complaints about - central heating plants, dumps, food processing, textile threat lea the road rubber factories, mechanical shops and steel plants, tanneries, cement limestone and asphalt stone processing facilities, cellulose and paper plants. 
p47
visible signs of pollution such as soot, dust and other particularities make an ambient odour seem more pungent (engen 72) 
meteorological conditions are important - all odours stinger more toxic and unpleasant downwind of source. 

indoor air - less attention in press, but may actually be worse. 
more time spent indoors
1930s - Ney York researched using door as the index by which to jude indoor air quality
public spaces well assessed
home spaces is often worse. fresh air for ventilate his contaminated whin it passes through dirty filters or because of poor design it comes through other rooms rather than directly outdoors. 
potential poolutatnt exceed those for outdoor air -building materials furnishings cleaning products etc. 
p48
Yaglou, Riley and Coggins 1936
pioneering experiments in the 30s to determine the amount of fresh air needed in a room to make it odour free. Complex problem No consensus on precise formula for air exahcnge, though it i clear that a lot of fresh air is required to keep a rom doorless. Expensive proposition. 
p49 attempt to save energy in the 1970s led to the construection of tight but sick buildings. 

different pollutants need more time and more fresh air to disperse than others. 
the best index of air quality is door and the sense of smell is the most sensitive and versatile instrument for judging air quality, robust, not as daily distracted as has been claimed. 


p50
masking
less expensive tan adding fresh air - increase the pleasantness by perfuming it. Psychological technique - masking or modulating one odour with another. 

Limit to the effectiveness of masking. 
p51
hiding a weak malodour may work 
but
adding a fragrance to a strong malodour will not eliminate it, will possibly amplify it. Could smell both odours, unpleasant combination. 
best to avoid use of artificial odours - olfactory noisy. 
Deodoriser helps - the air is contaminated and should be cleaned
That is what is wrong with the old practice of using perfume to cover bo. 
One auld be aware of dirt and contamination. 
p52
what is perfume to one person may be unfamiliar and a negative stimulus to another. 
one must know in advance or be told that an odour in a strange place is a perfume because the ability to identify the source of odours with the sense of smell is poor. Disaggess with claims that odour have inherent motivational and emotional effects. 

p53
uses the word perfume for commercial products 
fragrance for natural products of vegetable origin

p60
impression management - create favourable impression to other people
induce positive responses
(this is all in respect to personal scent, but I think could be applied to homes swell. )

p62
stimulation effect in keeping the environment interesting and counteracting boredom. Attention getting  and evocative attributes of odours play crucial role in keeping minds alert and engaged. 
Contexts in which fragrances are used for environmental or personal management must be clearly defined to take advance of this. 


-------------
Largey and Watson, Sociology of Odours
in Smell Culture Reader
p38
shared experience through odour - religious use of insence
odorants applied extensively in the roman Colosseum during gladiatorial games
aim to create a communal, we-group feeling. 

deodorising and odorising various setting s- each has socially expected or desirable or dour. 
Odours to control - this is a sensation rather than a scent - tear gas actually burns. Disagree with this use scenario. 

Jim Drobnick preface

p3
olfactocentrism - response to the commonplace critique of vision implicit in term ocular centrism - visuality's predominance
p14
Odorphobia -cultural, ideological intolerance towards smells as directed at places or people 

odours - means by which boundary between self and others is demarcated. Olfaction is a means to corporealise dislike and prominent excuse ofr expressions of racism, sexim, classism and xenophobia. 

odourlessness manifested as white paint, shiny surfaces and panoramic vistas that continue in architecture an dcity planning. 

olfactory silence
