Jim Drobnick
Volatile Effects Olfactory Dimensions of Art and Architecture
in 
Empire of the Senses ed david bowes

p265
aromatic dimension has been neglected in architectural theory

effects created by odoriferous materials, ventilated scents and other wafting perceptions can significantly influence one's experience of a structure
p266
anosmia of white cube gallery = smells are pathologised as symptomatic of pests, or pollution
despite vigilant removal of smells no place is rule inodorate. 
p267
white cube = disciplinary technology, to compartmentalise, isolate and train perception

museums overtly acknowledged their goal of disciplining and disinfecting the subordinate classes, the imperative of sanitisation was intented in metaphorical and literal terms with regard to bodies and minds
p268
where museums were once sterilise there are demands for inclusion of olfaction 
stale incense of hero worship - Clive Bell
p269
post modern museums: heterogenous stimulation, sensory saturation, indicator of authenticity and to engage visitors on a subtle perceptual level with implicit physiological or psychological effects. 
museums appropriated elements from theme parks, malls, boutiques, for courts, indistinct boundaries and blurring of activity, smells cross over ethe threshold an permeate the inner sanctum of artistic worship. 

Hererosmia 
generally unintended result of mixing and close juxtaposition f previousl separated activities. 
synthetic scents imply a certain power over nature, over history, over the limitations of visual artefacts, depenstrate an instituieosin hipness towards multimedia and sensory saturated viewing environments, serve as a quick fix for the image of the museums so that despite the multiple crises challenging it s credibility, it can avert self scrutiny and structural change. 

p271
the decontextualising of smells from an historical period and placement in a 20C tourist attraction seems highly dubious as each person visiting the centre will have a different perception or attitude towards a smell and it is quite likely that it will be very different from those held by the people who originally produced and lived with the smells. The problem is compounded by the fact that one begins to wonder if Victorian streets, Medieval universities and viking villages were all steeped in the same, obviously-artifical, chemical odour version of wet cats. Walsh 1992, 112-113

inconsistent to single out smells in this way, as everything that the museum presents can be critiqued this way

argument against synthesised rathe than actual smells is stronger. Instead of confirming authenticity of experience, fake smells distort olfactory discrimination and sever the ability to connect doors to their natural sources Damian and Damian 1995 130

smells stil a strategic interventions. 
presentation of scent in context specific manner still holds a potential to reconfigure the museum experience. 
authority and coherence are not guaranteed by collections and curatorial directives but by each visitors experience. 
perform the content, rather than consume

p272
intimate influence on the quality of lived experience. Phenomenonolgical architects call for pronounced intensification of presence. 
p273
standardised methods of production = sterility and lifelessness, dulls or negates the senses
p274
sick buildings - inadequate ventilation and emissions from construction materials

the ethical quandary of environmental or ambient fragrancing. Why more coercive than coloured lights or piped music? molecules are ingested into the body. Critics argue that individuals should be given the opportunity to provide voluntary informed consent Damian and Damian 1995 108-40

p277
dialectical odlrs - strategic use of smell as intervention into and means to cirque, abstract or essentials political conceptions of space. 
interrupts the context into which it is inserted. Contractid the conventional assumption so place and space, render them more openly schizophrenic,  competing meanings draw out implicit political dynamics. 

Janet Murray's pair of bathroom installations *Expulsion from Paradise*  intervenes into the antiseptic utopia of the restroom. Eden recreated by adiiion of bulrushes, water lettuce wild ginger, likes which exude a refreshing verdant challenge to the acrid smell of urinal disinfect an. Oases seek a reconciliation between indoor and outdoor deodorised culture and bounty of nature, the germ free and the life sustatnin. conflicting odours confounds judgements. 
p278
use odeur de luxe - Mark Lewis atomised women's perfume in men's bathroom, and men's cologne in womens, interrogates the polities of identity construction and performative maintenance. Forces sa confrontation with architectures roles in naturalising sexual difference as an  unproblematic opposition. 
p279
irony of spreading an door such as pin or lemon on clean surfaces and thus dirtying them in the process of cleaning is mentioned by Trygg Engen and Kethleen McHugh. 