smog

Daily Mirror Friday October 1955, p7.
'smog cure' on kitchen shelf
Ronald Bedfor
You may get it by the bottle
Housewives may soon be able to reach for a bottle to beat the Smog seeping into their homes. Government scientists have produced an anti-Smog bottle like the familiar kitchen smell-kiiller. It contains ammonia. When Smog seeps through doors and windows into the living -room, you uncork he bottle, pull up the wick and the ammonia neutralises the sulphur acids in Smog that irritate the lungs. 
Thatto make sure only the right amount of ammonia is resealed strips of a special detector paper are provided with each bottle. The paper turns red if the atmosphere is too Smoggy. Blue if too much ammonia is coming out of the bottle. Greenish yellow when the smog-killer is doing it's job properly. A small-scale trial of the anti Smog weapon has just begun. Seventy five bottles and detector papers have been handed out to bronchitis sufferers and doctors in London. The cost of these antismog bottles is about 3s. 
Pigs give idea
The experts hit on the ammonia idea because pigs and sheep brought to London for a show during the "killer" smog of 1952 were unaffected. Yet nearly 4000 Londoners died from the effects. It was thought that ammonia from the pigs and sheep stalls might be the answer. Tests with guineapigs proved that ammonia did protect them against sulphur-laden Smog. A Leading medical expert wh lis organising the trial told me yesterday: "If the method works then a simple cheap smog remedy will be available for every household. But until all the facts are known and we publish results, people should not play about with ammonia during a smoggy period. Fore there may be danger of which we are not yet aware and there is always the risk that the ammonia might fall into the hands of children. 

Daily Express 06 Jan 1956 p1
Smog worse than 1952
Hospital sends oxygen tent SOS 
is it killer smog?
Gas warfare experts from the chemical defence station on Salisbury Plain were called in by the MRC to help deal with the "poison gas" attack launched by Londoners themselves.

ammonia bottles in St Bartholomews Hospitals - neutralises sulphur fumes in the air
 

front page Daily Mirror 06 Jan 1956
Smogland It may be the worst fog ever
smog last night covered a greater area of Britain than did the killer smog of 1952
black out belt stretched almost from the south coast to the north of Yorkshire. 

AA (authority as traffic was affected)
New weapon
a new anti-smog wagon - uncorked ammonia bottles - was used in two wards full of chronic bronchitis at Bart's hospital. If value to some patients. 
Two smokeless zones - the city of London and centre of coventy were almost free of fog during  the day. 

Nothing about indoor air quality or what you can do about anything 

Daily Express Tuesday August 14 1956 p7
They fight smog with a collar
Postmen in London and Manchester are to try out a new device to beat smog this winter. It is the smog collar. From the collar plastic in front with a an elastic band at the back hangs a small canister which releases small doess of ammonia vapour to kill the smog. Postmen will wear the little scarves as they deliver letters. Thurty have been asked to volunteer to test the collar in London and 30 in Manchester. Expertsf rom the MRC will examine the results. Mr Jospeh Ashworth "Manchester branch president oft the PO workers union said "Smpog is a scourge for anyone who has to work in it. Post men are particularly exposed. If these experiments are successful we will call for 1000 more volunteers from counter staffs and people who come in contact with smog. 

Fact: We are going to kill 10 000 people in 5 years
Help the Express to get something done
Second day in a camping for action against the looming problem o fth winter killer smog. Yesterday reported on vigorous action in New York and Los Angeles. Now what is being don in London and the other great cities of Britain? The following report by express Science Reporter reveals a pathetic programme of almost criminal futility.  Let it stir Your conscience: stir you to act in your city now. 
mentions development of plastic collar soaking in ammonia - not limited to postmen this tim, al people who must go out in smog. 
practically nothing has been done to reduce the poison in the air
authorities argues that the principles incorporated in the new Clean Air Act should soon eliminate smoke.
factories
Home fires - perhaps the worst offenders - depends on good supplies of smokeless fuel. Unlikely to be enough to satisfy even the blackest industrial areas in the next 10 years at the present rate of progress. 
railway engines woest polluter
motor vehicles  fouling the air entirely escape the Act. No longer any doubt that the fumes in diesel and car exhaust reach dangerous strength in busy streets. Poroposes to outrage our consciences and to keep them in that condition a new coroner's verdict should be brought in to describe prevent alb esmog-deaths "murdered by the community"

28 Nov 1956 Daily Express p11
smog masks for postemn -
lightweight ammonia fed 
ammonia vapour from crystal s in the plastic masks . If successful the masks will be develop for th public. 

Daily Mirror Wed 14 Sept 1960 p19
Hope for a million ... New drugs are beating bronchitis
The moment autumn weather sets in they start wheezing hacking and grunting.fog, damp, cold, smog, infection. 
People prone to bronchitis should live in the country if possible, away from smoke. If they must live in towns and cities they should try to get indoor jobs. In smoggy days the injurious sulphur in the atmosphere can be neutralised indoors with ammonia . Carefuly fill a bottle with one part strong ammonia, two parts water and three parts methylated sprits and stand the bottle on a window sill.  (no further details on what this does, or when to refresh it, whether to use a wick)

Daily Mirror October 18 1962 p6
Smog - six ways to beat the killer
Roy Blackman
yesterday gave 6 tips to keep you out of trouble
breathe through the nose
stay indoors, keeping the windows shut and the smog out
neutralise the most harmful ingredient in smog, sulphur dioxide by filling a jar with two thirds ammonia and one third mentholated spirits and sticing a wick into it. place on a window sill. 
warp scarf over nose and mouth
buy a mask
stay  in bed and sleep upstairs because fog concentration is geatest at ground level. 

bronchitis is Briatins second biggest killer to heart disease. 
last year bronchitis killed 31492 Britons, the highest figure since 1951
worst bronchitis areas were eth  heavy industrial parts of the midlands and coal mining districts like south wales, and the big cities. Smog - coal smoke from seemingly harmless  domestic fires. 


