One of the chemical methods for effective weed clearance on paths and areas of ground before planting up with aesthetically pleasing displays or productive vegetables and fruit, is sodium chlorate, or chlorate of soda as it is also known, had been embraced by home gardeners and allotmenteers. Sodium chlorate was introduced to the readers of the National Allotment Society's journal, in a 1934 article about tidily kept allotments (unkempt allotments were a major bugbear of the society). The journal claimed to have received requests for more information about this wonderful weedkiller and letters from disappointed enthusiasts about being unable to obtain it. In 1935 the National Allotment Society arranged for sodium chlorate to be packaged in quantities appropriate for domestic use and made it available through their National Horticultural Supplies seed and equipment sales business. Previously, sodium chlorate had to be bought directly from importers or manufacturers in large, industrial sized quantities and this was too expensive and too large a quantity even for an allotment association clubbing together. 

Sodium chlorate was sold in the form of crystals, like salt, which were dissolved in water before being sprayed or applied with a watering can onto the area afflicted by weeds. There was a known problem with this chemical - when the solution soaked into gloves or other textiles, then dried, the friction from by wearing the sodium chlorate impregnated garment caused the chemical to ignite or explode. This effect was initially described by the National Allotment Society as an inflammable gas given off as the garment dried, but after doing some more research, gave their readers a comprehensive description of the action of friction. The explosive nature of sodium chlorate provided entertainment for anyone pyrotechnically inclined, with sodium chlorate sometimes being substituted for potassium chlorate in homemade bangers. Other than autumnal calls for controls on sales to children, the chemical remained on unrestricted sale until 2004 [CHECK DATE]. When its withdrawal from the market was announced, devotees stockpiled the chemical and lamented the loss of such an effective weedkiller. 
[is this at all related to anti terrorism efforts?]

Sodium chlorate is a very effective weedkiller, but it also remains so for several months. For gardeners who want to be able to use the area soon after ridding it of weeds, a different product was needed. 

