spare rib magazine

chemical search: 
results predominantly to do with drugs and health, especially contraception and reproductive health. There are reports on pollution, such as oil spills and the chemicals that break up the spill being worse than the oil itself, and the fact of chemicals being found in breast milk. That article was interesting as it focused on the organisational and awareness raising campaign of the German women but not really on any practical actions that anyone could take. It didn't say to stop breastfeeding but it didn't attempt to address the claims of severity of detecting such chemicals in the milk, or to address what might be done in the UK. 

An article on thrush was probably the most interesting, revealing that some people may perfume, deodorise, use bubble bath or otherwise introduce unnecessary chemicals and that this was a major step in overcoming the infection. 

Chemical and other hazards at work were discussed in 
Danger Women's Work 4 page pull-out to put in your workplace
Author: Women's and Work Hazards Group
Issue: 78, pages 41-44
Publication date: January 1979 
home is also mentioned, but nothing is really followed through. There is a big separation between home and work, unclear whether people would perhaps do stuff at work that they would not at home, or whether because they are exposed at work would also choose to use a product at home.
Is focused on negotiating and workplace equipment and rights, not protecting self at home.
Effect on fertility is prioritised over cancer, which is not mentioned. Stress related seems to be more of a problem than chemical exposure though it highlights trichloroethylene (trike) exposure to typists/office workers, hairdressers' exposure to toxic sprays, dyes and detergents, packing and processing various chemicals
"women working at home may be at risk from unsafe wiring or dangerous chemical sprays (aerosols) such as pesticides and polishes, in many cases it is the same sort of chemical that women are exposed to at home as out at work. 62% workers in cosmetic industry are female. The harmful effects of various combinations of chemicals inhaled or applied to the body are virtually unknown."

he Witches Garden: International Garden Festival, Liverpool
Author: Herzog, Juliet
Issue: 147
Publication date: October 1984
p38
money could have been better spent on other things. Garden designed and planted by women, informative boards explaining this were very welcome best thing about it as garden was unkempt when visited. 

Whose bloody battle?
Author: Merck, Mandy
Issue: 8
Publication date: February 1973
Usage Terms: © Mandy Merck
Cleaners at Oxford university colleges on strike re. pay - nothing about chemicals, but more about organisation, unionisation and fair pay. 

"I'd rather swallow the druggist's shop and the man in't than have another kid"
Issue: 64
Publication date: November 1977
37-39
Washing soda listed among chemicals used to induce abortion by women in Victorian and Edwardian britain - unclear whether drunk or applied internally (p37)

Cystitis
Author: Briggs, Angela
Issue: 8
Publication date: February 1973
19+22
bicarbonate of soda in water drunk to as part of treatment. p22

Discovering Women's History
Author: Campbell, Katie
Issue: 141
Publication date: April 1984
p42
1911 household accounts "after rent, burial insurance, boot club, soda, wood, gas and coal only 7s left for food" didn't say how much there was to start with or how far /how many people 7s was supposed to look after

Memories of my mother-in-law
Author: Clarke, Merlin
Issue: 29
Publication date: November 1974
12-13
pre 1930s - mother in law remembered her mother doing laundry by putting bleaching soda and ordinary soda to boil. When more money was available she used Hudsons soap Powder instead of the two sorts of soda.  

Power to the Green Consumer
Author: McHarry, Jan. Hyam, Pippa
Issue: 194
Publication date: September 1988
50-51
no mention of sodas, no mention of named products really


Plan of Action
Author: Thomas, Elean
Issue: 202
Publication date: June 1989
p54
....it stinks because that is the past that produced nuclear weapons and has wantonly and self indulgently been destroying the environment of all for the profits of a few

there is never any mention of how consumers might possibly have a role in this, desiring products or at least using them when they become available.


Good cartoon "Contaminated well - women getting water - we don't bother buying pesticides anymore. We just spray the crops with our groundwater"
p58 Britain taken to European Court, poisonous chess not banned but water will be treated in new plants paid for by consumers. 

: Genetic Engineering: Part One
Issue: 199
Publication date: March 1989
24-26
Remember atoms?: fundamental units of matter so loved by nuclear physicists whose quest led to the atomic bomb. Well biologists took a cue from physics and are now turning their attion on gens basic units of living things (p24)

weird, anti-science article generally, though is also the only one to mention herbicide  

zero results for paraquat