Access provided by University of Chester [Change] Project MUSE
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/v012/12.2.brownlie.html

Browse > Social Sciences > Business and Society > Advertising & Society Review > Volume 12, Issue 2, 2011
"(Re)covering" the Spectacular Domestic:
Culinary Cultures, the Feminine Mundane, and Brand Nigella
Douglas Brownlie (bio) and Paul Hewer (bio)
Introduction
Madonna is the true feminist. She exposes the puritanism and suffocating ideology of American feminism, which is stuck in an adolescent whining mode. She has taught young women to be fully female and sexual while still exercising control over their lives. She shows girls how to be attractive, sensual, energetic, aggressive, ambitious and funny—all at the same time.

Camille Paglia1
This paper unpacks the iconicity of brand Nigella. In doing so, we show that the cultural logic of the economic space occupied by this brand springs from signifiying networks of interpenetrating positions generated within discourses, not only of food, family, and cuisine, but of sex, gender, and sexuality. We argue that the core appeal of brand Nigella has as much to do with the recipes it makes available for "thinking" feminine identities,2 as it does the information it provides as a culinary instruction manual about the preparation of food. Indeed, in many respects, the coded instructions on taste and lifestyle norms carry the food recipes within carefully manipulated assemblages of glossy, mediatized treatments of culinary culture. The brand mines a rich seam of contemporary identity politics, "socially anchored consumption norms,"3 and public mood. As a cultural brand, it deliberately exploits persistent lifestyle tensions between the lived and mythical realities of the feminine mundane within such sites of perennial discursive struggle as domesticity and motherhood. Indeed, an atavistic marketplace appeal is partly animated by playing to existential anxieties that tend to accompany liberatory steps taken to resolve such tensions, through pursuing an aspirational gravity towards disinhibiting celebrations of voluptuary feminine appetites: those empowering spaces of transformation, transgression, glamour, and covetousness, where permission is always already available to think and shape other identities, other forms of sociality, other social lives.
As an exemplary celebrity brand within mediatized culinary culture, we claim that brand Nigella, like brand Madonna before it, dares not "transcend sexist identity stereotypes,"4 but rather must manufacture marketplace appeals that draw upon those stereotypes, and "trades in them." To explain how the calculated and inventive constructedness of the brand engenders such marketplace appeal, we consider the cultural logic of celebrity, unpacking the role that celebrity brands play in assuaging the existential doubt of transformative and transgressive identity work for managing insistent anxieties and contradictions that arrive with it. In exploring the cultural meanings that celebrity brands circulate, we employ the work of Holt,5 especially his concepts of cultural branding and identity myths, finding a role for what he refers to as "meaningful stories, myths that work as salves for contradictions in the nation's culture."6 Or as Barthes in his own time preferred: "Myth has an imperative, buttonholing character: stemming from an historical concept, directly springly from contingency…it is I whom it has come to seek."7
The context for our discussion of these analytical notions is the cultural logic of the culinary economy as it is represents itself in cookbooks and related media product, and how it feeds off and enlivens notions of motherhood and domesticity. Appadurai reckons that "we need to view cookbooks in the contemporary world as revealing artifacts of culture in the making."8 Brand Nigella, as we reveal, can thus can be understood as a particular version of culinary cosmopolitanism in the making;9 carefully crafted for its productive potential; carefully crafted to assuage the frustrations and anxieties of a primarily female middle-class audience; carefully crafted to give that audience permission to change; carefully crafted to tease desire out of its domestic closet and to illuminate the emancipatory potential of feminine ambition and aspiration; and carefully crafted to provide the salve to quell existential doubt that can become internalised as guilt. How all this is managed thus forms the substance of this paper.
Home is where the Celebrity Brand Is
Discussions of consumer culture theory10 have little to say on the notions of celebrity, domesticity and motherhood. The authors are curious about this, given that contemporary consumer culture is literally awash with manufactured celebrity product, laboring to help consumers fashion and refashion desiring selves from packaged identity resources. To the list of celebrated celebrity feminine "cooks"—the term "Chef" or "Masterchef" being reserved for their hypermasculine male counterparts—Martha Stewart, Elizabeth David, Fanny Cradock, and Delia Smith, must surely be added that of Nigella. Nigella joins that long list of luminous, celebrated actresses: Marilyn Monroe, Rita Hayworth, Jayne Mansfield, Audrey Hepburn, Elizabeth Taylor, to name but a few; and celebrated divas, Judy Garland, Barbara Streisand, Whitney Houston, Madonna, and Beyonce Knowles—all of whom exist in the hallowed territory of celebrity stardom and fandom, most residing in a mythical land where surname becomes the sign, sufficient to communicate the charismatic glamour and appeal wielded by such iconic personal brands.
Brand Nigella manages both to announce and exploit multiple, competing subject positions in circulation around the identity myths of domesticity and motherhood. Representations assembled from those subject positions suggest a new-improved narrative of domesticity and motherhood for those that find themselves treading that well-worn pilgrimage of grinding drudgery, exhaustion, and denial, the time-starved, body-conscious, guilt-burdened, credit-shackled, contemporary multi-tasking woman.
Figure 1. 
Cover of Nigella Express.
View full resolution
Brand Nigella constructs a version of femininity for our post-feminist, post-gender, botoxed times that, while sounding overwrought, precious and, at times, frankly pantomime daft, also manages to strike an alluring and comforting alternative note to the present discourse of austerity, global insecurity and family breakdown. Brand Nigella works hard to achieve a subtle blend of "ease and tease"; of virtue and vice; and of safety and danger: that is to say, it is not simply propped up through offering refuge within reassuring visions of domestic life combined with personal values of approachability, humor and accessibility; rather it stages and enacts such edgy propositions as homeyness11 with a dash of culinary sexyness, providing resources for negotiating the inherent contradictions and frustrations of the sometimes relentless tedium of the everyday feminine mundane.
However, in some important respects, this imagery, while simulating disinhibition, confidence, and empowerment, simultaneously speaks of and to several persistent anxieties of the contemporary domestic feminine condition. Its unspoken return to the reassuring order of domesticity and motherhood is the basis of marketplace appeals and mythologies to stressed, anxious, bored, and unrewarded women.12 And in doing so, it deliberately states that a return to traditional family values is possible without retreating all the way from career to home, from emancipation to subjection, or becoming a willing accomplice to domestic servitude and slavery. Brand Nigella gives permission to be back in the home in a way that trumpets lifestyle choices through empowering and rewarding new ways of doing the feminine mundane. Brand imagery speaks of and to existential crises and ontological dilemmas over experiences of time scarcity, anxiety, and stress generated by striving for peer recognition as a successful, state-of-the-art woman-of-action, juggler of the commitments of worker, wife, mother, lover, and "yummy mummy."13 It does this through images that, while sharing the lived experience of role tensions and intense contradictions, makes available compensatory resources for helping to rework existential deficits commonly experienced in the everyday feminine mundane, while negotiating competing desires for acceptance and exception.
The introductory blurb for the later, 2007 extension and incarnation of the brand, the Nigella Express cookbook, reveals:
The Domestic Goddess is back but this time it's instant. Nigella and her style of cookery have earned a special place in our lives, symbolising all that is best, most pleasurable, most hands-on and least fussy about good food. But that doesn't mean she wants us to spend hours in the kitchen, slaving over a hot stove.

Featuring fabulous fast foods, ingenious short cuts, terrific time-saving ideas, effortless entertaining and simple, scrumptious meals, Nigella Express is her solution to eating well when time is short.

She continues:
Here are mouthwatering recipes, quick to prepare, easy to follow, that you can conjure up after a long day in the office or on a busy weekend, for family or unexpected guests. This is food you can make as you hit the kitchen running, with vital tips on how to keep your store cupboard stocked, freezer and fridge stacked. When time is precious, you can't spend hours shopping, so you need to make life easier by being prepared. Not that the recipes are basic—though they are always simple—but it's important to make every ingredient earn its place in a recipe. Minimise effort by maximising taste. And here too is great food that can be prepared quickly but cooked slowly in the oven, leaving you time to have a bath, a drink, talk to friends, or do the children's homework. Minimum stress for maximum enjoyment…14

As a slogan for brand Nigella, "minimise effort by maximising taste" seems to fit the mood of a contemporary petite bourgeosie and efforts taken to (re)invent available domestic identities in the image of its own taste and lifestyle aspirations. In seeking anaytical inspiration, we turn to Bourdieu on habitus and the role of the petite bourgeosie in manufacturing distinction, which he suggests imposes and embodies a set of ethical norms around lifestyle, taste, and consumption practice:
Seeking its occupational and personal salvation in the imposition of new doctrines of ethical salvation, the new petite bourgeoisie is predisposed to play a vanguard role in the struggles over everything concerned with the art of living, in particular, domestic life and consumption, relations between the sexes and the generations, the reproduction of the family and its values…the new ethical avant-garde urges a morality of pleasure as duty. This doctrine makes it a failure, a threat to self-esteem, not to "have fun"…The fear of not getting enough pleasure, the logical outcome of the effort to overcome the fear of pleasure, is combined with a search for self-expression and bodily expression and for communication with others ('relating'—exchange), even immersion in others (considered not as a group but as subjectivities in search of their identity).15

This is perhaps why the naturalistic denouement for many TV food programs has to be the ritual display of food as a means for sacrifice, or what Maffesoli might refer to as, our being-togetherness16 —a culinary gift and gesture which makes material the ephemerality of the feminine mundane as a form of immersion in others. In conveying those all-important ethical brand qualities which speak of the domestic and the communal, it does so while suggesting that such qualities can be grasped with managed effort, justified and legimitized as caring about doing one's bit for the greater good of others, especially among the voracious gastronistas of dinner-partyland.
Figure 2. 
View full resolution
Brand Nigella ain't that shy about coming forward; ain't that shy about maximizing its brand assets (as they say in Brand Management textbooks17 ); ain't that shy about responding to any lingering doubts over the earlier Domestic Goddess message, with its all-encompassing, all-too-labor-intensive, all-too-1950s goodwife in the kitchen for "man-appeal," as staged in the early slice-of-life "Katie" TV ads for OXO cubes in the 1950s.18 But most importantly, Brand Nigella works hard to enjoin us against the choices and dispositions of the necessary, an all too terrifying place signalled, as Bourdieu suggests, by a "resignation to the inevitable."19 Instead, through consuming and living the Nigella way, we might say that domestic space becomes a site for culinary work of a different kind, which takes the form of the re-chantment of the labor of identity, the pleasure, fun, and hedonism around an ethics of consumption and the all-too-consuming delights of the spectacular. Here the kitchen becomes, as Floyd suggests, "set apart from the relationships of home or the routine responsibility for feeding people."20 Culinary myths are then enacted as an aesthetics of performance which must offer transgression rather than subjugation, subversion over convention, sociability over alienation and isolation—a world of creative possibilities over that of constraint and stricture. And one way in which this is achieved is through its emotional aesthetic and appeals to intimacy to construct and sustain its brand imaginarium. The work of Woods21 draws our attention to the emotional terrain which contemporary lifestyle brands now inhabit. Central to the nostalgic tendencies inherent within what was termed the (re)turn to "Domesticity," as associated with the writings of Mendelson on "Home Comforts" and Konig's "Domestic Bliss,"22 was a revalorization and re-inscription of the domestic space as an extension of female identity. Here the home is symbolically reclaimed, not as a place for toil, mess, drudgery, and exhaustion, but as a site for fulfilment, esteem, and empowerment. Charles sums up the contribution of brand Nigella to this discourse when he suggests: "Food for Lawson is all about comfort. With a little help from her own sexy personality and glamourous beauty she translates this philosophy into five successful cookbooks and several very popular TV shows."23
The Spectacular Domestic
Chaney argues that "celebrities work at the dramatisation of mundaneity."24 Media product and the celebrities it manufactures embody that thin line between communicating and displaying, for all to see, the ordinariness of the everyday and the flight to the spectacular and extra-ordinary. In being able to blur this distinction rests their appeal in an age when, as Debord observes, "society has lost the community that myth was formerly able to ensure."25 The spectacle that is the manufacture, the promotion and the practice of celebrity is one of today's key reference points, where culture has become "the star commodity of the society of the spectacle."26 Bell and Hollows explore how celebrities (or "lifestyle experts") take upon themselves the role of "advising us on consumer choice—interpreting the lifestyle landscape for us rather than dictating how to live […] voice and manner are important here, too, in making expertise ordinary, which also means making it accessible and inclusive."27 Perhaps this is why Brand Delia (Smith) is seen as too schoolmarmish and hectoring Nanny Mummy. Brand Nigella also treads a tricky line here as a cultural intermediary. But it is clearly the case that her TV gastro-makeover programs work hard at the dramatization of mundane spaces, such as the kitchen, garden, and dining room table, in a breathlessly "ecstatic"28 coupling of silky dulcet tones, cover-girl looks, über-cultural awareness, and knowing flirtatious affectations which work hard to convey the possibility of the spectacularity of the domestic sphere. The savage ritual of appearances here is thoroughly calculated, and as Baudrillard writes, "it [calculation] functions as a mask [regulating] beyond appearance, the play of mobile divinities [Brand Nigella], the hidden objectivity behind the subjectivity of appearances."29
Figure 3. 
View full resolution
In this light, it's useful to turn to Cashmore and Parker's assessment of the appeal of brand Beckham, as a weaving together of contradictory representations of masculinity: "[Beckham the brand] confuses and conflates all in one. He is 'new man' (nurturer, romantic, compassionate partner) and 'new lad'/ 'dad-lad' (soccer hero, fashionable father, conspicuous consumer—some would argue, all round, cosmetically conscientious 'metrosexual') while demonstrating vestiges of 'old industrial man' (loyal, dedicated, stoic, breadwinning)."30 Perhaps we can offer that brand Nigella, much like its male kith-and-kin brand Oliver, works in a similar fashion, syncretically blurring the distinctions, the apparent inconsistencies of traditional, stereotypical stay-at-home mummy (family-caring, husband-pleasing, apron-bedecked-homemaker), with professional-entrepreneurial mummy (smooth operator, woman-on-top, sisters doing it for themselves, out-competing men), but also managing to conflate such modes of femininity31 with that of the glamour and sexiness of yummy-mummy. In her 2010 offering, Kitchen: Recipes from the Heart of the Home, this is made explicit, where the weight of kitchen work is displaced with a set of resources for the budding gastro-cook:
Kitchen Quandaries and Kitchen Comforts—Nigella gives us the wherewithal to tackle any situation and satisfy all nourishment needs. But real cooking is often about leftovers, too, so here one recipe can lead to another…from ham hocks to pea soup and pasties, from chicken to Chinatown salad. This isn't just about being thrifty but about demonstrating how recipes come about, and giving new inspiration for last-minute meals and souped-up storecupboard suppers. As well as offering the reader a mouthwatering array of new recipes, both comforting and exciting—from clams with chorizo to Guinness gingerbread, from Asian braised beef to flourless chocolate lime cake, from Pasta alla Genovese to Venetian carrot cake—Nigella rounds up her kitchen kit must-haves (telling us, too, what equipment we don't need) and highlights individual ingredients—both basic essentials and modern-day life-savers. But above all, she reminds the reader how much pleasure there is to be had in real food, and in reclaiming the traditional rhythms of the kitchen, as she cooks to the beat of the heart of the home, creating simple recipes to make life less complicated.32

Unpacking Brand Nigella
As Leonardi notes, "[A] cookbook that consisted of nothing but rules for various dishes would be an unpopular cookbook indeed. Even the root of recipe—the Latin recipere—implies an exchange, a giver and a receiver. Like a story, a recipe needs a recommendation, a context, a point and a reason to be."33 Roy herself likens contemporary cookbooks to travel journals, reveling in tales of "vicarious experience."34 And, as forms of vicarious "culinary tourism,"35 we suggest they operate to mobilize consumer taste and desire. How they manage this is interesting, since contemporary TV programs and accompanying cookbooks and share little with the recipe-driven formulas of a Mrs Beeton or even Delia,36 where emphasis is placed upon the ethos of management, planning and control.
Instead, it is the autobiographical element, which Roy traces within the work of Madhur Jaffrey, which similarly resonates with brand Nigella. Herein, the recipe, the TV show, the cookbook, the TV appearance, the website update, the blogging, the twittering, the app, is but an excuse for the staging of a form of getting-up-close intimacy and affect between cook and viewer or reader; a sharing, if you like, of experience and emotion through the optic of mediatized worlds of culinary consumption.
A vibrant celebrity brand feeds off merchandising and related media product which is clearly invested with various subjective capacities associated in the audience's mind with the human brand. In the case of brand Nigella, such opportunities include not only glossy books and magazine articles, but all manner of objects of gastro-desire in the form of a line of designer kitchen technology, ranging from swanky red measuring cups to nifty serving hands, from cookie cutters to an all-purpose pot (well, who needs lots of pots cluttering up the kitchen when you can have one), and a wipe-clean, laminated shopping bag adorned with cocktails and delectable deli goodies, or as she explains on Nigella.com:
I have a terrible habit of walking around town with tatty plastic bags and this is my attempt to rehabilitate in style. I can get a spare pair of shoes, books, magazines, emergency rations and the usual rubbish in here, and it actually looks good on the arm too: no more bag lady.37

The Living Kitchen cookware line is available globally from selected retail outlets. It generates annually more than £7 million. The product range is enlivened by a number of glossy, stylized cookbooks, which are similar to the how-to manuals of yesteryear, presenting ready-made solutions or salves to our doubts and anxieties—like those of How to Eat, How to be a Domestic Goddess. This also includes a variety of TV programs and accompanying books which are exported overseas, from those of the Nigella Bites era, to the more recent offering, Nigella Express.38 Viewers and readers are transported to that fantasyland where the impossible is made possible—a land in which it is possible to not only have your cake but to eat it too—a land in which we are drawn into a seductive variant of the feminine mundane, a branded subject position around which it is possible to do identity work which involves doing the cooking and caring for others, and giving others pleasure, if you can make that choice work for you. However, it is not necessary to be chained to the kitchen sink catering to meet the needs of others and to find there a feeling of being loved and needed. It is also possible to choose to care for yourself, say through taking trouble to feed yourself and choosing food you like, rather than deferring to the choices of significant others. In constructing her version of the celebrity chef, the pleasures of cooking, eating, and caring are linked in representations of domestic life which admit the importance of caring and hedonism to dealing with the conflicts and anxieties experienced by working women.
In Nigellaland we are transported to a magical place of plenty; a space where all-too-knowing consumers, culinary lifestyles, and well-stocked supermarkets sit side by side and reign supreme; a land in which you can literally express it all (but at a cost); a land where, as Ewen observes, "social bonds [are] cemented by affection and emotional interdependence rather than by the dictates of traditional patriarchy."39 This narrative seeks to assuage any doubts or anxieties experienced by her credit-crunched, time-poor, Viagra-induced cosmopolitan constituency. This is a hegemonic land of taste and stage-managed distinction, where everybody (or at least those willing to take on the debt) has that most desired and cherished of kitchen adornments, the salt pig (and it has to be a full size one measuring 16cm x 18cm). To those not in the know, this is a pot for containing salt, but for Nigella afficionados this unnecessary object of adornment is magically transformed into an essential must-have through the storytelling capabilities of our brand author:40
I am a complete Maldon salt addict, and like to be able to keep my salt out at grabbable distance near the stove at all times. Again, the salt pig I own is functional, but no more, and I wanted one as a part of the range, one I really wanted to live with and take pleasure from just seeing it on the kitchen top.

All aboard the Nigella Express then, a spectacular realm in which the kitchen becomes a magical familial and homely space: a site not simply for domestic toil, rules and drudgery, but a reworking of domestic space as a site for self-fulfilment, calculated hedonism and premeditated fun. Here we are being sold a particular version of commodified pleasure and liberation, where the gals all look great, even in the morning, and even when making the meals for her imaginary, cosmopolitan gastronista guests, and for those yummy kids. This is a magical realm where the washing-up never needs doing; a land where the everyday choring of cooking is banished never to be seen; a land where the clamoring pressures of kids and the daily grind of employment are subdued. A glamourous and all too seductive version of culinary sexiness and homeyness where the mundane and ordinary are never allowed to set foot. In contemporary consumerland, where size zeros rule the celebrity roost, Nigella stands out for her retro-voluptuousness. For her 2000 cookbook offering, How to be a Domestic Goddess, the inset pages contain golden-hued (sepia would be just too old-looking) images of Stepford Wives revelling in the delights of taking the Sunday roast from the oven, exuding poise, grace, and what can only be described as ecstatic delight at the marvels of deftly wielding a rolling pin and measuring milk from a bottle. The blurb for the book reads:
This is a book about baking, but not a Baking Book. The trouble with much modern cooking is not that the food it produces is not good, but that the mood it induces in the cook is one of skin-of-the-teeth effiency, all briskness and little pleasure. Sometimes that's the best we can manage, but at other times we don't want to feel stressed and overstretched, but like a domestic goddess, trailing nutmeggy fumes of baking pie in her languorous wake…41

Brand Nigella thus feeds off the current retro-zeitgeist to offer a particular version of "doing domesticity"'; her currency and widespread appeal result from the brands' ability to navigate, negotiate, and even side-step tricky cultural and feminist contradictions, especially that of the drudgery of the domestic sphere. For as Floyd writes on the domestic kitchen: "Bounded by walls or not, it remains the site of dirty work of transhistorical, transcultural symbolic meanings, the space where the raw, the unclean and the defiled are brought and where the social rules attendant on civilized life are reiterated, where status is confirmed and exclusion practised…a zone of feminine subjection where women must manage a ceaseless routine of work."42 Kitchen work and its thankless and never-ending character were never going to work as a selling proposition to attract and sustain a consumer audience and cultivate desire for the brand, and so it is that Brand Nigella must navigate these lived frustrations through what might be termed the celebro-confessional. Or, as Nigella exhorts in the introduction to How to be a Domestic Goddess:
I neither want to confine you to kitchen quarters nor even suggest that it might be desirable. But I do think that many of us have become alienated from the domestic sphere, and that it can actually make us feel better to claim back some of that space, make it comforting rather than frightening. In a way, baking stands both as a useful metaphor for the familial warmth of the kitchen we fondly imagine used to exist, and as a way of reclaiming our lost Eden.43

Here the brand positioning performs a form of social repair to displace the anxieties and frustrations of domesticity as female identity, with a contra-flow around the craft and comforts to be had from baking and enjoying the fulfillment that comes from caring for others and sacrificing oneself to the demands of others. In this manner, the success of brand Nigella cannot simply be explained by recourse to her perceived credibility, trustworthiness, expertise, or attractiveness, as the Brand Management literature44 would have us believe. Instead, we might offer that the brand's attraction resides in the aesthetics of performance which it offers to her consumer following.
For as Moore speaks of the particular brand of oral fantasy offered up to consumers: "Denial is the name of the game here. Deny that all this cooking is hard work and call it 'unwinding'. Deny that eating all this food will make you look more like Ann Widdecombe than the divine Nigella Lawson. Deny that part of you believes that, if you do as she tells you, you will get as well connected and successful as she is. Nigella knows all about denial. That is why she gets to have her cupcakes and eat them."45
Homeward Bound(ed)
Once upon a time, in a land not so far away, celebrity brands circulated in what we like to think of as Fast-Moving-Consumer-Cultures (FMCCs to coin a phrase), in which brands provide the social "lubricant"46 for increasingly fraught social relations. To achieve this circulation, movement, and marketplace appeal, celebrity brands must offer a set of compelling culinary myths to continue to attract and satiate our appetites for consumer desire. For as Sternberg remarks in his discussion of phantasmagoric labor, "Performers gain market value by mobilizing demeanor and conduct so they reference a realm of meaning that consumers find evocative."47 Indeed, it is possible to argue that notions of domesticity and motherhood, having for many years been usurped by the demands of parody and ignominy, have presented themselves as vulpine remnants of the barren wasteland of gender struggle and retribution. And so it is that such contested spaces have once again became available for recovery, for rethinking, for a fully fledged makeover capable of energizing the fascination of a new generation of audiences with appeals, animus, and attractions, rather than contradiction and frustration. In this sense, the basic poesis of the domestic, of home and hearth, its repertoire of tropes and idiomatic inventions, was, like many good tunes of yesteryear, always on the wheel of rediscovery, awaiting that moment when someone would once again recognize a timely message and seize the day with an updated cover version. Feminism certainly achieved and orchestrated a flight from the domestic and its politics, injustices, disputes, and tragedies.48 Discussing the work of Donna Haraway, Thien observes that gender remains "undone work,"49 and domesticity and motherhood share this unfixed and ambiguous, unravelling character. Yet, never mind "the" realities, who needs "the" reality in a world where the real is all too terrifying and in need of displacement and shelter from. Better than reality, at least if you want to strike a chord and achieve popular manufactured appeal, is the evocative magic of illusion and fantasy, dashed with a liberal sprinkling of home solutions for making "life less complicated." Gastrobrands, in this context, have little to do with rational functional appeals to logic and calculation. Rather, their logic and calculation operates as gastroporn within a heady and beguiling emotional economy, the gastrosphere if you like, where the suspension of disbelief and reenchantment become the soup of the day. The stuff of food becomes less about subsistence or abstinence or appetite, and more about nurturing and nourishment as central brand tropes occupying the menu for doing domesticity. We have delved into an emotional economy where market-making serves to reshape the domestic through (re)fashioning culinary myths around the home as various stages where the spectacular domestic is regularly invented, found, and performed. Spending a little quality time with cleverly designed cookery books, cradling their richly indulgent writing, their visual cunning, immersed in the spectacle of the photography and the brand imaginarium, will reveal that such manifestations provide, not only a certain tactile pleasure in handling their beauty, but a little guilty frisson at the indulgence gastroporn pays to sexual appetite. And the staged televisual spectacle of Nigella dipping her forefinger teasingly into a warm nest of chocolate will clearly remind you of the nexus of food, sex and femininity: and more prosaically perhaps, that "sex sells."50
Douglas Brownlie  
Douglas Brownlie is Professor of Marketing at Stirling University. His work is in the field of consumption, markets and cultures, and current research interests include representation and composition, consumer ethnography, the professionalization of marketing practice and discourse, and the currency of postmodernism and critical theory in the study of marketing.

Paul Hewer  
Paul Hewer is based at University of Strathclyde Business School. He is interested in all aspects of contemporary consumer culture, from cookbooks to "lifestyle" gardening texts; from car cultures to exploring consumer resistance to marketing. He is also interested in tribes and subcultures, and he employs visual and textual methods to unpack and theorize consumption.

Acknowledgements
The authors are very grateful for the thoughtful and supportive reviews received on this piece, and the work of the Special Issue Editors in pushing this project forward.

Notes
1. Camille Paglia, Sex, Art, and Amercian Culture (New York: Vintage Books, 1992), 4.

2. See our previous work for prior renditions on this theme: Paul Hewer and Douglas Brownlie. "Culinary Culture, Gastrobrands and Identity myths: 'Nigella', An Iconic Brand in the Baking," in Advances in Consumer Research, eds. Ann McGill and Sharon Shavitt, vol. 36 (Duluth, MN: Association for Consumer Research, 2009), 482-487. Or for a take on Brand Oliver, why not sample Douglas Brownlie and Paul Hewer, "Prime Beef Cuts: Culinary Images for Thinking Men," Consumption, Markets and Culture 10, no. 3 (2007): 229-250.

3. Adam Arvidsson, Brands: Meaning and Value in Media Culture (London: Routledge, 2006), 24.

4. Grant McCracken, "Big Hair: A Journey into the Transformation of Self" (London: Indigo, 1997), 111.

5. Douglas Holt, How Brands Become Icons: The Principles of Cultural Branding (Harvard: Harvard Business School Press, 2004).

6. Holt, How Brands Become Icons, xi.

7. Roland Barthes, Mythologies, trans. Annette Lavers (London: Paladin, 1985 orig. 1957), 124.

8. Arjun Appadurai, "How to Make a National Cuisine: Cookbooks in Contemporary India," Comparative Studies in Society and History 30, no. 1 (January 1988): 22.

9. We take this notion from Appadurai, "How to Make a National Cuisine," 22; but also link to Thompson and Tambyah's notion of cosmopolitanism: Craig Thompson and Siok Kuan Tambyah. "Trying to be Cosmopolitan," Journal of Consumer Research 26, no. 3 (1999): 214-240.

10. Eric J. Arnould and Craig J. Thompson. "Consumer Culture Theory (CCT): Twenty Years of Research," Journal of Consumer Research 31, (March 2005): 868-882.

11. See Grant McCracken, Culture and Consumption II: Markets, Meaning and Brand Management (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2005), 24. He explores "how domestic environments serve as sites of individuality, sanctuaries against work, centers of spirituality and staging grounds for important bundles of activities, values and undertakings in Western societies called 'domesticity.'"

12. While we focus on the lived experience of the feminine mundane in relation to brand Nigella, we do not mean to erase the condition of masculinity, nor overlook the importance of the influential men present in the narrative of Nigella's life which also informs the narrative of Nigella the brand. It is simply a matter of focus and space that we are unable to explore the provider character of the traditional and new patriarch within ideologies of domesticity and family. Suffice it to say that strategies for feminine identity work are no longer simply framed by constraining bonds of patriarchal authority.

13. For more inspiration try Stephanie O'Donohoe's "Yummy Mummies: The Clamor of Glamour in Advertising to Mothers," Advertising & Society Review 7, no. 3 (2007): 1-17.

14. Nigella Lawson, Nigella Express (London: Chatto and Windus, 2007).

15. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste (London: Routledge, 1984).

16. Michel Maffesoli, The Time of the Tribes: The Decline of Individualism in Mass Society (London: Sage, 1996).

17. See Kevin Lane Keller, Strategic Brand Management: Building, Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008).

18. See www.oxo.co.uk/oxo for such images.

19. Bourdieu, Distinction, 372.

20. Janet Floyd, "Coming out of the Kitchen: Texts, Contexts and Debates," Cultural Geographies 10 (2004): 61-73.

21. Richard Woods, "Exploring the Emotional Territory for Brands," Journal of Consumer Behaviour 3, no. 4 (2004): 388-403.

22. For more on this see Woods, "Exploring the emotional territory for brands."

23. John Charles, "Nigella Lawson: A Biography," The Library Journal, March 1, 2006.

24. David Chaney, Cultural Change and Everyday Life (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2002), 113.

25. Guy Debord, Society of the Spectacle, 3rd edition (New York: Zone Books, 1994), 132.

26. Debord, Society of the Spectacle, 137.

27. David Bell and Joanne Hollows, "Making Sense of Ordinary Lives," in Ordinary Lifestyles: Popular Media, Consumption and Taste (Maidenhead: Open University Press, 2005), 15.

28. See Jean Baudrillard, Fatal Strategies (London: Pluto, 1990).

29. Ibid.

30. Ellis Cashmore and Andrew Parker, "One David Beckham? Celebrity, Masculinity, and the Soccerati," Sociology of Sport 20, no. 3 (2003): 214-231.

31. Such conflation is the basis of a popular TV advertising format, a recipe that has proven effective for branded household goods since the 1950s. Known then as 2TK (two "tarts" in the kitchen), the script personifies the tensions and contradictions of the feminine mundane, presenting the basic problem of conventional domesticity through staging it as one harassed, distressed, plain and untidy housewife busily occupied in her kitchen with housework, being interrupted in her labors by the unannounced visit of a talkative and inquiring friend. The basic solution (the brand) is presented in the form of the other, visiting housewife, the knowledgeable friend who, through sharing her knowledge of the brand and her experience of using it, offers a liberating pathway to having time for dropping in on friends and for glamour. The brand offers emancipation from the drudgery, subjection and unrewarded tedium of the feminine mundane.

32. Nigella Lawson, Kitchen: Recipes from the Heart of the Home (London: Chatto and Windus, 2010), book description.

33. Susan Leonardi as quoted by Parama Roy, "Reading Communities and Culinary Communities: The Gastropoetics of the South Asian Diaspora," Positions: East Asia Cultures Critique 10, no. 2 (Fall 2002): 478.

34. Parama Roy, "Reading Communities and Culinary Communities," 471-502.

35. Douglas Brownlie, Paul Hewer, and Suzanne Horne, "Culinary Tourism: An Exploratory Reading of Contemporary Representations of Cooking," Consumption, Markets and Culture 8, no. 1 (March 2005): 7-26.

36. Born in the UK, Delia Smith is renowned for her book, Delia's Complete Cookery Course (BBC Books, 1989) and her later offering, Delia's Complete How to Cook: Both a guide for beginners and a tried and tested recipe collection for life (BBC Books, 2009); Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management similarly offered guidance and tips to those setting up home in the Victorian age. Kathryn Hughes, in The Short Life and Long Times of Mrs Beeton: The First Domestic Goddess (New York: Anchor Books, 2007), labels her the "first domestic goddess."

37. http://www.nigella.com, accessed November 28, 2007, http://www.nigella.com, so probably changed by the time you try, as things move fast in the worlds of culinary celebrity consumption.

38. The list goes on (as does the profit) but here's a sampling: How to be a Domestic Goddess (London: Chatto and Windus, 2000); Nigella Bites (London: Chatto and Windus, 2001); Nigella Express (London: Chatto and Windus, 2007); Kitchen: Recipes from the Heart of the Home (London: Chatto and Windus, 2010).

39. See Stuart Ewen, Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the Social Roots of the Consumer Culture (New York: Basic Books, 2001), 183.

40. And thus does luxury become necessity; does form precede function; and does the plain become the complexified.

41. Lawson, How to be a Domestic Goddess, inset page to front cover.

42. Floyd, "Coming out of the Kitchen," 61-73.

43. Lawson, How to be a Domestic Goddess, vii.

44. See Keller, Strategic Brand Management. See also Sorren Askegaard and Anders Bengtsson, "When Hershey Met Betty: Love, Lust, and Co-Branding," Journal of Product and Brand Management 14, no. 15 (2004): 322-329, for a neo-Freudian discussion of the limits of traditional branding approaches as applied to the case of Betty Crocker brownie mix with Hershey's syrup.

45. Suzanne Moore, "Pure Oral Fantasy," New Statesman, June 25, 2001.

46. Here the debt is to Barthes' Mythologies, who was on the right track when he spoke of wine as a "galvanic substance…[since] it can serve as an alibi to dream as well as reality." Gastrobrands operate in similar terms, having powerful dream-making possibilities and thereby serving to re-enchant reality.

47. See Ernest Sternberg, "Phantasmagoric Labour: The New Economics of Self-Presentation," Futures 30, no. 1 (1988): 3-21. Or his, The Economy of Icons: How Business Manufactures Meaning (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1999).

48. Here we are thinking of Dorothy Hobson's "Housewives: Isolation as Oppression," in Women Take Issue: Aspects of Women's Subordination, Women's Studies Group Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (London: Hutchinson, 1978), 79-94. Or better yet, Ann Oakley's The Sociology of Housework (New York: Pantheon, 1975) and Housewife (London: Allen Lane, 1974).

49. Deborah Thien, "Recasting the Pattern: Critical Relations in Gender and Rurality," in Critical Studies in Rural Gender Issues, ed. J. Little and C. Morris (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2005), 75-89.

50. See Scott Robert Olsen, Hollywood Planet: Global Media and the Competitive Advantage of Narrative Transparency (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1999); Hamish Pringle, Celebrity Sells (London: Wiley, 2004); Irving Rein, Phillip Kotler, and Martin Stoller, High Visibility (London: Heinemann, 1987).

Copyright © 2011 The Advertising Educational Foundation, Inc.
Advertising & Society Review
Volume 12, Issue 2, 2011

Research Areas
Social Sciences > Business and Society
Recommend
Email a link to this page
  
View Citation
Save Citation
Subject Headings
Advertising -- Brand name products.
Consumption (Economics) -- Social aspects.
Related Content
Interview with Stephan Loerke 
Interview with Stephan Loerke
Une société consumériste d’information orientée vers une infosphère éthique / For an Ethical Infosphere in our Consumer-Oriented Information Society 
Une société consumériste d’information orientée vers une infosphère éthique / For an Ethical Infosphere in our Consumer-Oriented Information Society 
Consumption as a Source of Social Change 
Consumption as a Source of Social Change 
You have access to this content
Free sample
Open Access
Restricted Access
Welcome to Project MUSE

Use the Search box at the top of the page to find book and journal content. Refine results with the filtering options on the left side of the results page. Use the Browse box to browse a selection of books and journals.

Connect with Project MUSE

Join our Facebook Page
Follow us on Twitter
Project MUSE | 2715 North Charles Street | Baltimore, Maryland USA 21218 | (410) 516-6989 | About | Contact | Help | Tools | Order

©2014 Project MUSE. Produced by The Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Milton S. Eisenhower Library.