Risk

Private and Public Spheres
Habermas

Kelley described the development of 'partial, cramped and imperfect freedom' for women in the domestic sphere brought about by the public sphere widening in the inclusion of women, and by the availability of consumer products that aided housework.1 

Front gardens and yards are visible by the public, and as Paul Robbins notes the lawn can be the root of community pressure to keep maintain uniformity in the neighbourhood, at least in the USA.2 This strength of feeling, and associated intrusion into the way that the visible space is kept has not been commented on by historians of British gardens, domesticity or housing, in anywhere near the same way that cleanliness and hygiene inside the house has been written about, suggesting that the garden is somehow different. MJ Daunton wrote about the use of outside space in Victorian working class households, including drying laundry in the front yard specificially provided by housing planners to keep the laundry lines out of the streets themselves,3 but this topic does not seem to have been covered further by those studying more recent history.

Experts
The construction of expert committees was examined in Merchants of Doubt,1 which exposed deliberate inclusion of contrary characters, not to ensure rigorous questioning but for the potential to mislead the group, distracting the committee from their task, derailing the productive use of time by directing the group to needless questions. This research focussed on committees in the United States, but it should open researchers eyes to the potential for this type of personal interaction within expert committees studied in Britain. So far, what I have read about the relevant committees does not indicate that there was this type of wilful disruption going on. 

Pesticides Safety Precautionary Scheme

Poisons Rules

Industrial Physicians




Social construction of technology
Technology in this case can be understood as a designed substances, objects, actions and knowledges, however rule of thumb or technical (Bigelow). 


Users



Users bring their own experiences, practices and interpretations to using products. This is understood in the way tests are done on likely acceptance of new products. Highlighting the many small differences between the way that people use the same product, Jellinek advised that controlled user tests give quicker, cheaper and more reliable results rather than completely natural home use tests where the huge number of variables between the ways that the product will be used is uncontrollable and unknown.1 

In Meikle's examination of the reuse of plastic bags there are many similarities with the use or misuse seen in household chemicals. He showed a pattern of praise for the new technology, followed by accidents affecting children, in which children were left unattended with bags and became asphyxiated, which were followed by adult suicides. There was media uproar and media experimentation with plastic bags. The company denounced the misuse of the bags by the user, but were also worked to make the bags safer to avoid the consequences of misuse, and eventually keeping bags away from children became common sense, although accidents never entirely stopped and the media attention deceased.2 

