Swindled
Bee Wilson, 2008
John Murray, GB

pxii
adulteration  - ideas changed radically over time (e.g. salt in butter to disguise rancidity, hops in beer)

opposite pattern prevails no - maniny ingredients once seen as harmless, saccharine, colourings, hydrogenated fats, redefined as adulterants. 
2 simple positions - poisoning and cheating

pxiii
defines scope - does not writes about drugs, only food and drink, alshtouh almost all legislation on adulteration has also dealt with adulteration of drugs. 

Frederick Accum
(p6) German in London, well connected, chemical lecturer and teacher, purveyor of chemm equipt, royal apothecary, populariser of Lavoisier, writer on every subject. 
wrote a treatise on adulteration, people were aware of it, but he made people take it seriously. 

p5
ed of literary Gazette ' too serious for a joke to see that in almost everything which we eat or drink, we are doncemned to swallow swindling if not poison'

p16
organoleptic approach - use senses to tell what was pure, good
limited by knowing how something should taste/smell/look and food can be tampered w v subtly

p18
1819 charwoman solved mystery of strange blue tea - in the habit of drinking green tea mixed with a teaspoon flu of spirit of hartshorn or ammonia, which she presumably added for medial reasons since it can have done nothing for the taste. ammonia sometimes taken internally to help circulation or relieve headaches. 

p19
Treatises filled with simple chemical tests
freezing - think not exactly simple for most people!?
muriate of potash to find if lemonade doctored with tartaric acid.

appeal of treatise was the time and place in history - industrial scalee adulteration serious, endemic problem. Industiralised and impersonal city - swindlers can get away with it

p20
almost no-one asks how food can be so cheap, or why sweets are coloured unnatural shades - focused instead of class consciousness, desire to eat white bread, eat coloured sweets. 
cunning and ignorance combine to creat hazards. 

p21 - not always to deceive, sometimes not using the right tool for the job, did not know consequences. 

p221 - rationing acclimated people to substitutes which they would once have thought as shoddy. These were now normal and not seen as cheats. Instead of turning away from processed and substitute foods after the war, the British public began to eat more, offered the illusion of freedom at a low cost. 

p94
buyer beware vs seller beware
turn of millennium new trend - steak or burger rare or medium rare - might be asked to sign a legal disclaimer accepting the restaurant could take 'no responsibility' for the safety of meat cooked in this manner. 
p95
attempt to redress a balance, getting at question of who is responsible for food that consumers put in their mouths. Restruatuers burdened with responsibility from all sides, shift a little of it back to the individual. 

seller beware - govt, press, ASA and consumers all exert pressure on food sellers to stick to their promises and to be clear about what those promises are. 

mid Victorian Britatin - press publicised bad case so adulteration but did little to inform the consumer against buying falsified food. Sellers assert that the public likes it and will have it. Who was responsible for preventing swindling. Consumer. But they were least equipped to do anything about tit. 

p259 onward
writing about Ralph Nader - I've avoided him so far because I've thought of him as very American, but I think that she's including him because she's looking internationally, but also because of the influence he had on consumer action groups. 

p262: 'lobbyists would campaign against one swindle or poison only for another to spring up'
p263: Red no 2 named as suspected carcinogen conference win 1956. Banned in 60s USSR after soviet sic linked it to cancer. FDA banned in 1976. 
did not reduce chemical load. 
increased production of Red no 40. some consider it more harmful than Red 2. 
Red 40 too valuable to the food industry. Consumer confidence sake by Red 2. Govet chose not to acts against Red 20 . 
p264: shows approach of fighting chemical additives one by one - fine in days of Accum when limited number of chemicals, but harder when so many chemicals everywhere. Additives rarely eaten one at a time. 

p268
conferences on food safety - arrogant food scientists 'potatoes and preservatives' - poisons occur in nature, food hs never been totally safe, modern additives were nothing new. 
preservatives - all be keeling over with food poisoning without them. 
preservatives accounted for less than 1% all additives used. 

p303
pesticides  - seen by some as an adulteration - proliferated partly as a remedy for adulterations. Offered the dream of a totally clean for supply. 
p304
fragile sensibilities kept in a sate of childlike innocence, preserved from the truth that dirt and food co exist. Peter Barton Hutt 1978 'Emotionally, the public is not prepared to accept the fact that agricultural produce is raised in fields and ssotred in barns.'
p305
squeamishness about aethsteic adulteration has had unintended consequence - increased pesticide, much more damaging than the odd fragment of insect
down play risks involed in consuming pesticide residue as not eating an y fruit and veg would be a much bigger risk to health than eating foods continuing low levels of pesticide residue. 

consumers would rather have fruit dn bed that didn't put them at risk, esp as pesticides not efficient 

p208
organic food can seem to mean 'food which won't poison me or my children if I throw enough money at the problem'. but don't be swindled by abandoning senses. 

