The Female Consumer

p7
shop loyalty - visit few different shops despite relatively high freq of shoppingg trips.  (re food shopping)
housewives value the  nearness to home int he case of independents, the range of goods for the multiples, the range of cut prices in supermarkets and the dividend at the Co-op

p23
shopping for nonfood - compared to food: there are indications of peaking to the end of the week, esp Saturday. Tobaco and laundry evenly s[read over week. A product which tends toward the smaller and cheaper end of nonfood scale will be more likely to share shopping patterns with food and grocery goods rather than buffer and more expensive goods. 

Soaps and cleaning materials are mainly bought on Friday and Saturday - though surely no need?

nonfood items that are not run in with the food purchases (i.e. those that are require a separate trip other than the supermarket grocery) hisband and wife decide on product together

p25
direct selling - not so much a cleaning, gardening or photo supplies thing? more makeup/personal care, equipment

p37
describes the trend to non-food retailing in supermarkets as women are consistent users of these for food shopping, growth of non food goods (hardware, household textiles and small durables) will affect the traffic of women to stores which have in the past tended to stock them - larger branches of Woolworths, small electrical wholesalers drapers, dept store and Co-ops. 

p38
supermarkets have always offered certain non-food goods which are part of constant household usage and linked with food purchases such as detergents toothpaste and soap. Now in many supermarkets the range has been extended but separated from the oritingal food section. 
Turnover of nonfood is slower, but sales of nonfood are growing faster in the long term. 
biggger trading margin for nonfood
not so susceptible to drastic price cutting as food goods since brand competition is relatively low

p39 
tesco pioneered non-food with Home-'n-Wear
(seems to be mostly home supplies - blankets, containers etc)
promising areas are flowers toys and garden equipment

p43
£8.5 million household and furniture polish market - as a nation the British do not relish polishing and rubbing compared o the French or  Dutch. Average housewife buys only 1.28 units of polish a year for her household. AB housewives like aerosols and DE like the traditional solid waxes. Young housewives like the convenience of sprays and a fifth use liquids only. The remaining 40% use combinations. Convenience and a blind eye seem o be the order of the day. 

£3 million insecticide markted in 1970 continues to expand - less messy methods of insect control tailored to housewives' needs, e.g. new, expensive slow release strips. Aerosols had 60% penetration of market value, strops worth 1.5 million and aerosols 1.6 million. AB prefer strips, mainly younger housewives who buy domestic insecticides. 

p57
feeling of stocking = source of pleasure (fewer trips for larger quantities
vs social shopping - more trips for smaller amounts 

p64
Charlton 1972 - regularities in peoples consuming behaviour, e.g. brand loyalty are well codumented but less attention is given to the comparable importance of consumer shop choice. He suggests that this is particularly unsatisfactory as the importance of the retailer looms up in proportion to the manufacturer in the total marketing process. 

p67
retailer tends to underestimate the potential of researching the female consumer for himself. Often wide communication gaps. 
Simmons 1972 research by retailers has lagged - lack of precedent, when a company is successful without using research they are dubious about its value, also that retailers are closer to consumers and believe they can spot trends more quickly and accurately than macros who are several steps removed. posts also lack of familiarity with marketing research methods. Retailers make use of their internal stats but this is only what was sold and not what might have been sold; descriptive, not diagnostic
apparent closeness to consumer = misleading

p74
Bradford /HCF study among 1000 housewives in UK conducted by Uni of Bradford Management Centre with Horniblow Cox-Freeman Ltd 1969 found that most popular promotions were money-off, followed by others that represented value for money: extra quantity and free samples. 
p75
social class, working status, family type, age nor region were relevant to these preferences 

p81 
no published evidence on sex differences relating to promotional response or purchasing behaviour. 
sampling and stratification assumptions of all social scientists tend to militate against the accumulation of data on sex differences. Does the greater verbal ability of women make them more able to select brand names and take in promotional info compared to men who tend to excel in mathematical ability, and owl this greater skill make him more prudent shopper? 
Language should be a particular concern through sales message sin commercials and copy lines in ads. Men and women shown to talk in v different ways, in both structure and fluency. 
p82
Myers and Warner - perception of speech, adjectives
delightful did not vary much across groups (housevidves business execs, graduate business students and ug business students)
p83
moderately good, nice, slightly poor and unacceptable did vary between the groups. Housewives had 
certain words different connotations for men and women, given through word association tests. homonyms bow - typically sex interpreted, men relate to bow and arrow, women related it to decoration or sign of deference. 

marketing - few published studies on sex differences re packaging design, but those that have indicate different perceptions. Within - 

Pilditch 1973 - children up to seven or eight react to colour more than to form, and adults respond more to form than colour.
men react more to form than women do
Cheskin 1960 found certain shapes appealed more to one sex than to another - e.g. men liked triangles but women did not unless the corners were rounded

(p76 - James Vicary - normal blink rate of person is 32/min, shoppers decrease to 14/min = first stage of hypnosis - women did not recognise friends, walked into boxes, picked goods off the shelves at random. Gerald Stahl of Package Designers Council carried the finding to the extreme when he suggested that the housewife in a supermarket has so many choices that she needs a package to hypnotise her into picking her up, a good package should transfix a woman like waving a touch in front of her eyes. Reds and yellows he suggested are very good colours for doing this. )

p84
high proportion of men are colourblind - 1 in 15


p91
"psychological pricing - not just indicator of monetary value, but other intangiable values: luxury, exclusivity, the good life and becomes not so much a monetary appendage as part of the product mix"

tendency to defer to price as an indicator of quality = a function of a shopper's self confidence.
middles class housewives enjoyed the challenge while working class displayed nervousness and lack of confidence to discriminante between product on quality alone. 
but education level is also related - better educated in both groups more strongly believed that price and quality are related. 

surrogate indicator. 
more choice of alternative products, price becomes less important 

p92
reaction to prices not so much a function of own status, but of the family she represented - family income and size, car driver, all predict her relative price platform.

p93
own branding - 1971 report suggested that growth was slowing down but still represented a formidable sector. 
BMRB 1970 report indicated that buyers of own brands were younger (16-34 and more upmarket (ABC1). Especially true of M&S and Sinsbyr 

reasons inc cynicism about advertising claims, or economy, or buying for a young family at a time of relatively low income in the family life cycle. Bought own brands as brands in their own right, going to specific shops. 
Fading of old, poor quality image of own brand. 
March 1970 survey of 1000 women representing housewives in GB - 62% thought own brands were equal in quality and only 18% thought they were worse. Nearly 40% thought own label were better value for money than branded. 

**brand image potential often connect wit public and private consumption. Products that are consumed publicly and visibly are required to demonstrate more than the privately consumed ones the ideal self of the consumer. Cigarettes cars and beer = publicly consumed, so brand image is highly significant (Dolich 1969)**

p101
an individual turns more and more to others as she moves through the decision to make an innovative purchase and this will vary with the perceived risk associated with the purchase. Risk will vary with the perceived newness of the product. word of mouth works in two directions - 
Katz and Lazerfeld 1955: unfavourable w-o-m more effective in repelling consumers than favourable w-o-m was at attracting them. 

p103
time is more valuable when working, so attempt to reduce mundane work through convenience products. Expect busy women to be more prone to consumer convenince, so correlate with features of female affluence and occupation. Does not hold true. More a household characteristic (at least relating to foods) - stage in family lifecycle more likely to determine convenience food orientation than socioeconomic status (though Anderson, who conducted this study allegedly did not measure women's occupation, level of affluence or time available)

p119 Sampson 1968 - hierarchy of products based on price and purchase frequency of low to high family perception of the prodcts importance and thereby the extent to which they were housewife as opposed to household purchases. 
low unit price/ high purchase frequ: cleaning products, food, toiletries
p120
low unit price/ low purchase freely - proprietary pharmaceuticals, home decorating materials, speciality food not normally on weekly shopping list
c high price low purchase freq = durables, furnishings and furnitre
onwards
also encounter more family influence as more expensive

looks at child influence essentially as pester power, and what the child willingly consumes, rather than caring for child or making choices based on which is safest to have in house considering other members of household. 

p149 
extra family influence - mothers and friends. 
Joyce 1968 - young housewives turned to mother for advice on buying groceries 29% of the time compared to 21% to their friends and 18% for husbands. JWT 1968 noted that a third of married women under 35 live within walking distance of their parents and over half see their mothers at least once a week. 

mother in law also important but not as important as mother. influence of both mother and in-law diminish with length of marriage

p150 Wells and Gubar 1966
concept of lifecycle as an independent variable is new in marketing research though not in sociology. more sensitive indicator than chronological age.
no standard form of life cycle

wells and goober propose
stage 1 - young single people
stage 2 - newly married couples, no children
stage 3 - full nest I, young marrieds with depended children
stage 4 - full nest II, older marrieds with depended
stage 5 - empty nest; older married with no children
head of household still working
head of household retired
stage 6 0 solitary survivors - still working, retired

Joyce - 1968
1 - single/unattached
2 - single/ planning marriage
3 - married/ no children
4 - married/eldest under 1 year
5 - married /eldest ch 1-5 yrs
6 - married / eldest ch over 6

although there are variations, lifecycle is a valuable way to approach family decision making as it charts different roles and skills, where role playing is an important variation in decision making. 

p260
Women figure in the marketing industry in much the same way as they do in the great outside: as supporters, moppers of fevered brows, and in service capacities such as market research, which many men regard in marketing now as 'women's work'. It is significant that in an ad for the Observer magazine on the back of the Nov 1974 issue of Personnel Magazine in a montage of business execs only two women feature, one as a market researcher and the other as a systems analyst, both service occupations. mjorty of field interviewers are women, occupy as much status as the women in the factory who produce many of the proudest that the marketers market back to them. Male army with female minions confronting a large female consuming population. 
