The Amateur Photographer
The Journal for Everybody with a Camera
Readers questions Answered
December 27th 1944
p884
Obtainingn chemicals
I have been intending to make up several formulae give from time to time in the AP but I find chemists unable to supply many of the necessary chemicals. Can you let me know where I could get them? I enclose a list. DC Middlesex
Various chems used for photographic purposes are not always kept in stock by ordinary pharmaceutical chemists as many of these substances are not used in medicine or pharmacy. They can however be obtained from any of the big photographic dealers or from suppliers of photographic chemicals such as Johnson and Sonds (address) or your chemist can order them through the ordinary trade channels. We ourselves have had no difficulty in obtaining the chemicals on your list either from storck or to order from either chemists or photographic dealers. 
--------------

September 13 1944
p629
Flash powder and Magnesium ribbon
wish to take photographs - have table for exp and distance, how much ribbon must be used to replace each grain or gram of powder?
Answer given with no reference to any difficulty in obtaining either material.
------------

November 1st 1944
p748
Wartime substitute
I have a formula for a soft working metal developer for papers which I have used with success but it uses potassium carbonate, which I now find difficult to get. Can you recommend any similar formula sung sodium carbonate? JWB Suffolk
We suspect it would work equally well with sodium carbonate. Replace each ounce of pot carbonate with about 500grs anhydrous sodium carbonate or about 3 oz of crystalline carbonate. 

------------

July26 1944
p500
Hektograph Jelly without Glycerine
Glycerine hard to get - used to keep the ever sticky jelly (used on easel of enlarger) moist. Simulate this with an uncrystalisable sugar such as treacle or syrup into which has been stirred a quantity of deliquescent substance such as Mg chloride. Soak 1 oz gelatine in water, then heat, and stir in syrup and Mg chloride, plus few grains of carbolic acid or oil of cloves to presser and prevent moulding. 

--------

Front pages have photograph 
at least once every month Johnsons have an advert on the front - such as Wednesday 16 August 1944
A prize winning picture in Johnsons Competition
under which is
Be sure & take the temperature of your developer. It will help you to produce good results. Chemicals always have the last word


or under the photographs of two spaniels sharing a stick
- and don't forget this
- Chemicals always have the last word

under the image of a little boy stroking his new baby brother's head (21 June 1944)
Chemicals always have the last word

April 26 1944 Vol XCIV No 2894
front page Johnsons of hendon Chemicals always have the last word
The photographic sections of the RN, the Army and the RAF at home and overseas are all using Johnson packed developers

(Ilford/Selo film on war service)
Kodak film is on the soar fronts - accurate news for today, accurate history for tomorrow (Vol XCIV No 2889 March 22 1944

Vol XCIV No 2882 Feb 2 1944
It is no doubt very satisfying to be able to acquire the best that money can buy but even the wealthiest amateur cannot obtain photographic chemicals better, purer or more perfectly compounded than Johnsons chemicals
You can luxuriate in the knowledge that here at any rate, you and the millionaire are on an equal footing. The fixed selling prices of all the chemicals made by Johnsons of Hendon are modest in the extreme and within the reach of everyone who uses a camera. 
Made for discriminating photographers by Johnson & Sons Manufacturing Chemists 

Vol XCIV No 2878 Jan 5 1944
the wonderful qualities of present-day lenses and emulsions are minimised unless the developers you use are as pure, as reliable and as exactly compounded as the resources of modern science can make them. Always give your exposures every possible chance by using Johnsons Chemicals.
Made for discriminating photographers by Johnson & Sons Manufacturing Chemists 

Vol XCOV 2914 Sep 13 1944
Wherever You Go you will always find Dealers who are selling Johnsons Chemicals
scales brand

Vol XCIV 2918
Amateur photographers all over the world know they can rely upon the scales brand
Johnson & Sons mfc chemists ltd

Vol XCIV No 2926
picture of eggs and bacon (both uncooked) on plate
These are rationed but Johnsons Chemicals are obtainable everywhere


---------
metal poisoning listed in 266 Volume XC july 10 - dec 25 1930 (index)
ammonia without 108
chem. photog 21
dev in safety 531 (safe light?)
economy 63
flash pwder permitted 218
potassium thiocyanate, keeping 457
sodium sulphide, keeping 174


Vol XCIV No 2904 July 5 1944
p449

Avoiding trouble (notes on chemical)
when dive are compounded from bulk chemicals or from dry chems in packaged form, the directions should be heeded to the letter. Generally this consists of merely adding the chemicals to the warer in the proper order stirring continuously while each part is slowly added. No chemical except potassium bonide can be dissolved out of the order normally shown in the dev formulae (bromide can be added at any time). Each chem should be added only after the previous has entirely dissolved. The various unpleasant things that can happen if these precautions are not taken would make a full length article in themselves. From the Camera

Vol XCIV 2909 Aug 9 1944
p544
can only work intermittently - keeping power of chemicals? HEJ Hertfordshire
Most complete notes on chems and keeping power, best way to store them were published by ourselves as a "Dictionary of Chemicals" under the heading Facts and Formulae - July 22nd 1942 to Dec 9th 1942 inclusive. 
Many out of print but the Facts and Formulae have been recorded on microfilm and can be loaned with a 30s deposit which is returned without deduction when received back after 10 days. 
Notes also ound in Dictionary of Photography  and Avery full information about the more commonly used chemicals in a practical guide to photographic chemicals. 
Photographic chemicals and solutions by crabtree and matthews is also a mine of useful info. 

same page and issue
Mixed Brew
using Johnsons Acid fix hypo crystals, is it permissible to add kodak liquid hardener to obtain an acid hardening fixer? JV Essex
Kodak liquid hardeners should be added to plain hypo according to instructions. This will give you acid hardening fixer. Without experimenting we cannot tell whthet adding to JAF would be successful. There would certainly be excess acid and this excise might easily be sufficient to decompose the hypo slowly. It would do no harm to try this on a small scalea dn the mixture should be quite satisfactory in use provided it shows no cloudiness or precipicetation. 

----------------


(Nothing in this index for health, poison, ventilation cyanide, ration

-----------1961 index
unpleasant fumes 414
stain removal 414
potassium ferricyanide 492
is the amateur too wet-nursed 770
ferricyanide reducer 530
cleaning bottles 572
cleaning developing tanks 530

------------
1976
inside front cover is Durst advert 
all you need is time (1.5hrs) which folds out to reveal the kit needed

-----------
1980 winter home processing kits not feature in gifts, only cameras
hang on, they were offered the chance to win a set, and also highlighted that bottles of developer and fixer always come in handy and are inexpensive. (p98 w/e Nov22 1980)

-----------
1986 darkroom supplement
hardware only 
