The Wheatsheaf
January 1946
As one gardener to another
Sterilise Some soil
eelworm, insects, batctera
2 methods that any householder can adopt
fill a bucket with soil then suspend it from a pole in a copper of boiling water, the object being to allow the boiling water to reach up almost to the rum of the bucket but not to bubble into it. A potato the size of a hen's egg should be buried in the centre of the soil 1 in deep and when this potato is cooke the soil is sterilised. A bucket or two could be treated this way every week towards the end of a morning's washing. No fuel whittle thus be wasted if the husband got the bucket ready before he went to work I am sure no wife would mind seeing that it was treated. 

Those who do not boil their clothes at home or cannot fix up some scheme for treating the soil this way should use a chemical steriliser such as Formalin


[CWS has horticulutral dept]
Feb 1946
ordering seed do no t forget the fertilisers. Co-Hop Manure [haha]  CWS Humoso
hydrated lime, mutate of potash, nitrate of soda, Liquinure
new DDT Insecticide is for sale both in powder and liquid form as well as the synthetic root forming preparation. 
[no comment on efficacy or any potential side effects]

April 1946
catperillars - spray the bushes immediately the caterpillars are seen with liquid derris. If preferred nicotine maybe used instead, the formula being one ounce of nicotine and pound of soft soap to 10 gallons of water. there are some proprietary washes which contain nicotine. Necessary to apply the wash with some force through a fairly coarse nozzle so that the caterpillars are destroyed 

May
As one gardener to another
p9 permanganate of potash - quarter ounce dissolved in two gallon can of water to cover a two yard run of rows of peas = foot rot disease 
americans keen on paper mulching... advantage of keeping down weeds. It is difficult to use this now because of the shortage, but it should certainly be borne in mind 

August (no1, vol 51)
p4
in your grade
how are your crysanths?
scary with nicotine wash called Venetan. For mildew dust with fine sulphur. 

January
no 1, vol 52
p9
in your garden WE Sewell-Cooper
rotating your vegetables 
saves money on sparks and dusts

vol 2, No53 Feb  1948 
WE Sherwell-Cooper looking at the CWS spring seed catalogue p11 In your garden
helps to the gardener, root forming preparations (t hormones) the soil fumigants, the carrot fly remedies and we'll as the compost and manure makers like Adco and carotta. Maybe you want to tray DDT - well you can get it either as a powder or a liquid. You cn also get the tar oil you need tfor spraying your trees right away. 

vol 4 No53 April p11
in your garden
look out for the Celery Fly maggots which invade the leaves in may and June and cause blister. A good spraying with liquid DDT will usually give a satisfactory kill and will keep the egg laying flies away for about three weeks. Further DDT spraying may then be given

vol5 No 53 May p2
In your garden - start a gardening medicine chest
all insecticides required can be obtained direct from the CWS or through the local store 
1 tin liquid derris for killing aphids and caterpillars
1 tin slug destroer
1 tin nicotine dust which will kill most pest
1.5lb bag naphthalene to be applied between onions and carrots
1 carton DDT powder for dusting on celery, to dust along rows of strawberries to kill the stem cutting weevils and control the pean a bean bottles
small tin of Chestnut Compound for preventing damping off of seedlings
small tin of flea beetle dust
Some people may jib at the idea of paying 1s6d for this and 1s6d for that to keep their garden medicine chest stocked but it really is a tremens saving in the long run. What is the use of spending hours preparing the grounds, manuring, applying fertilisers, sowing seeds, thinning out only to lose the whole crop because of some pest. 
[nothing on weeds]

Mayp9
Making clothes last longer - ER YArham
clothes problem instigating any easier
no need to despair for with a little extra trouble they can be made to last much longer
best cleansing agent inc petrol, glycerine lemon juice, oatmeal and bran are difficult to get. Yet good substitutes can be found. For instance carbon tetrachloride is better in some ways than petrol because it is non-inflammable. Failing thisthe chemist can usually supply something of like nature. 

Turpentine for shiny marks, then apply benzene after to prevent stain
hot vinegar is good for removing grease marks
hats - velours, rubbed with rag moistened with pure benzine, also get rid of first and stains on felt hats. sponging with weak ammonia is another way worth trying
common salt for coloured felt - warm the salt and rub in well with flannel
p10 for grease spots
blotting paper and hot penny
eucalyptus oil
cloth coat splashed with mud - brush off dried mud, 1tsp bicarb in pint of water and rub over spots with similar material
tea stains on dresses - borax solution, 1 tsp to a cup
coffee - hotwater and soda (no ratio)
raw fruit stains - wash with warm water and finish by using hydrogen peroxide. 

When you next buy eggs
preserving them - 
mid march to may
handiest preservative is glycerine or water glass. Better than old fashioned method of using lime water. keep in well ventilated cellar or in a refrigerator. 
when only for a few weeks - cover shells with butter, sweet fat or glycerine

cheapest method - pickling in lime water, forms a hard lime layer over the shell. one or two pounds of slaked me in 5 gallons of water, stirred for a day then adda pound of sad, stand to settle and pour off clear liquid tfor use. Eggs must be entirely covered and not more than four inches form the top. 

augist no 8 vol 53 1948
p5 in your garden
heart rot in celery - dose with borax, quarter ounce per yard to provide boron (before planting)
stop celery fly?
dust with 5% DDT dust no an again in 3 weeks and once more after that . DDT isn't a cure for all ills, but it does stop this pest. 

October no 10 v53
labour saving border p5
no chemicals or hard landscaping, relies on mulch and heavy planting
"don't bother to keep hoeing the border month after month"

against fox hunting - people who are wealthy/over eat/drink do it

Woman's Outlook
cooperative guild magazine
self improvement - how to chair a meeting etc
knitting patterns, dress patterns, recipes
politics
interviews with guild women
garden design - actually it is quite practical - spade to a depth of three feet, add plenty of manure or compost and fertiliser. 


Rubitof - damp clot used for cleaning mirrors tiles, dresser pots pans woodwork (white or coloured) bath, floors, dishes your  everything except clothes. Also remove th grime and grease of cleaning from your hands

sold at all cooke stores in scotland 2 sizes mfc CWS Grangeworth 



I would expect to see soda shortage mentioned both in terms of household grocery sales and with respect to soap manufacturer. 
Nothing so far.
Am I looking at the wrong date?



consumers at sea - new statesman early may 1949

horticultural dept
agricultural dept
pest destruction dept
soap works
grocers


CWS Svineslghterier A/S and ICC Cyekjaer A/S
propose to attend the board meeting so these two co's in Herniing and Esbjerg respectively on the 19th 20th 21st September 1949
(abattoir and cheese maker?)


p204  7th oct grocery mancheter 1949
p2&3 minute 6 
that the Mcr Area Members of the Grocery Committee be asked to examine this problem; meantime that consideration of the recommendations is adjourned 
[no indication of what the problem was - soda?]

CWS Minutes 11 May 1948- 15 Mar 1949
ICI given in index as 119 but can't find anything on that page or others near it
possibly mistaken for ICA?