The Archers 
the first thirty years
1980
ISBN 0-413-478 30-0

p14raison d'être - propaganda
involvement with Whitehall 
Godfrey Baseley concerned than not enough farmers, esp smaller farmers were listening to his specialised info programmes when they needed to increase food production. 
pref experience MinInfo - gardeners to dig for victory, knew value of propaganda. 
called a meeting of farmer to see if new ideas were forthcoming. Henry Burtt from Lincolnshire asserted that a farming Dick Barton (derring do hero of action packed radio serial w regular / fanatical audience of nearly 4 million) 
p15
Edward J Mason - co writer of Dick Barton  - to get involved in writing the new programme. 
week's trial run in 1950 - fifty thousand listeners, but influenced more by response than numbers. 

p16
declaration of intent: any opportunity country matter be discussed in the HoC we should include the natural reactions of our characters to this subject. 
farmers - progressive in a quiet way, anxious to follow latest developments so far a finance and practical experience will allow,

p22
15% instruction is sufficient as the first object of the programme is to entertain

p25
 natural history  and folk lore - place and percentage should be 10-15%
by end of first year = regular 6million listeners

p26 1952 every farmer and farm worker in the county seemed to be listening and they were all experts. Sent in suggestions by the bagful and complaints by the score. Some suggestions were useful and used, and most of the complains discounted because in the 50s farming practices differed around the country. All served to underline the campaign for accuracy and attention to detail, led to creation of most comprehensive collection of sound effect available to a single programme. 
p27 publicity seekers - almost every organisation involved in farming and countryside (and many that were not) wanted to bet in on the act. 
links between programme and MinAg were very close, closer than would be welcomed today, A liaison meeting in 1953 editor and writers met 16 heads of division of the minister, general willingness was expressed by all concerned to co-operate and offered full facilities at any of their research stations, labs and experimental farms. 

p28
Daily Mail offered the accolade of most entertaining radio programme in its national radio awards in 1953 and 1954

p33 Daily Mail found the answer :Who are the guilty men?" re. killing off Grace Archer in a stable fire. 

p37
plan that Dan should be one of Britain's framers changing over from a dairy Shorthorn herd to Friesians. Could have serious implications for the British Shorthorn. BBC had to concede that the programme's strength - influence on an enormous audience - was also a weakness. No doubt that what Dan Archer did one day, others were quite likely to follow the next day. Plan shelved. 

p40
BBC television service asked for help in its campaign to increase sales of tv sets. Initial response negative. Dan archer did buy a tv set for Brookfield. Thin end of wedge that would break the dominance of radio and British home. 1957 daily figures had dropped by nearly a million, offset by an increase in just over for the weekend omnibus edition. 

p53
flood areas - dan sent half a ton of hay
haymakign in june - largely unmechanised
myxomatosis reached Ambridge

1955- food wheat and barely, sugar beet suffered from drought
1956 - foot and mouth outbreak, all cloven hoofed animals killed. 
foreign liver thrown into swill bucket without being boiled. 
planted potatoes to clean the land ready for black currants
1957 - hot dry summer, blight in potato clamp
1958 - doris had all her teeth out, wet summer, tuberculosis? pru forrest
1959 - rotavated garden the evening after planitn seeds


p89
well publicised visit to Northern Ireland in storyline, news item broadcast on Ulster radio and TV news'Inquiries about holidays here are a record level according to the tourist board. the Board says that its had more than 95 000 in quires from Britain and the Republic, up about 19 000 compared with the same period last year. Broadcasts about the Province made in the BBC programme the Archers are one of the reasons given for the increase.  
no direct commercial involvement, reflected programmes influence. 
there was considerable concern about some of the the things that happened when any of the actors or actresses visited apparently harmless agricultural show. 
p90
information officer (PR) protested when cast members photographed using product and  panel bearing the trade name was moved into more prominent position for the photos
p92
dialogue and realism wobble still further when advice is inserted. An example is the sermon in favour of women wearing specs, speaking like an advertising copy writer. 

p94
1967 - group of listeners considered too much farming propaganda - agreed with listener  who claimed visit to conference at Oxford gave the impression that the programme w being used as mouthpiece for the Ministry of ag. 

p96 international interest was high, with Radio Botswana joining the long list of orbs either broadcasting the Archers or translating it into their own language. (1968)
1969 -- many overseers countries dropped the programme
p97 reaction to a 1968 pamphlet called *Cruel Britain* implied programme condoned cruel practices on veal farms. Serial had long been target for complains, and abuse. Usually taken on the chin, but solicitors were consulted and instructed to call on you to justify your allegation against the programme or to withdraw it. Leaflet withdrawn. Never said or hinted that veal farms managed in the manner you describe do not exist. 

p99 
1960 - fowl pest, all destroyed
dead hounds - canine virus hepatitis
new milking parlour
1961 - polio, immunisation
no mention of any chemical/ab stories so far. 
1963 - sugar beet contract, precision drill and down the row thinner, cool wet summer, harvest good. 
1964 - lots of machinery/ equipment but not spraying 
1966 - sheep increase herd, make sheep wintering yard with straw bales
1967 - Phil won a world tour of farms with a competition essay about Farming in the Future
1968 Phil returns and thinks Ambridge Farmers ought to be more progressive

p138
Charles Lefeaux script editor manifesto second half of the 1970s -" intended as entertainment, takes place in an ag setting and should deflect rural events and new developments in farming but it is no longer intended to be an information programme. As Controller, Radio 4, says 'Plugs for any cause whatsoever are out' and we must be very careful not ob become heavy-handed when agricultural and country things are discussed. Audience research reports continue to show that two thirds of our regular listeners are working class, over fifty percent are over fifty and the majority are women.'" 

p140
Tony Parkin continued to supply a steady flow of farming stories
141
and to keep a check on the ag content and balance within th programme. 
1975 - ag accountant wrote to the Times accusing the writers of getting sums wrong in the winding up of the Bellamy Esate. Reaction was immediate - govts Finance Bill was being debated in the HoC and other newspapers seized on the opportunity to popularise the v complex subject of taxation. Anxiety in the BBC. 
letter from character Ralph Bellamy to the Times to explaining choice. 

p144
script conference/discussion - debate William Smethurst said he felt the BBC policy document on the use of trade names was ambiguous and Tessa Diamond said she felt tied by not begin about to write about politics. 
programme head said that the intent on trade names was to prevent advertising but the writers had a just complaint if that meant their scripts were turned into a kind of Esperanto. they were given room for manoeuvre.
Tessa told that reality of village life was that people did not declare their political affiliations or views either because they thought them too important to discuss, or taken for branded that everyone else know wall about them. If storyline made it essential, there was room for manoeuvre. 

p158
1970 - reorganisation of Bellamy Estate - reduced eyes, doubled cattle, replaced spring barley w brussel sprouts and doubling potatoes. Tony made dairy manager and sent on management course. Hay spoilt by heavy rain, but after 5 yrs of excessive rain 1970 was comparatively god. Corn harvest reasonable, mild autumn allowed ploughing to get well ahead. Polly reorganised the shop along self service lines. 
1971 - Tony archer attended a course on 'The spraying of chemicals'   (doesn't tony run an organic farm now?)
1972 - focus at Brookfield on beef rather than dairy
1973 - bull infertile, bull calf died from lead poisoning, ewe aborted after being worried by a dog. Elizabeth rushed to hospital after eating mercury dressed grain. 
1974 (p164) = soaring cats of feedstuffs led him to rely too heavily on silage and milk yields fell. Lowe butter fat content in his mil and two cows were blown through eating clover. 4 heifers developed New Forest disease. Outbreak of SVD = herd slaughtered 
1975 Pat bought 100 free range hens (married to Tony now). 2 pigs died from fighting, others developed anaemia when Neil forgot to give them iron injections. Sheep developed twin lambing disease when he cut back the feed to his in lamb ewes
1976 - Jennifer divorced then married Brian who bought her 12 Jacob sheep, she took up spinning and weaving. 
1978 p172-3  cows infected w brucellosis, ferret dead in a trap. craft shops opened and failed. Joe and Eddie started turkey venture, compensation from brucellosis eradication scheme. p174 - Brian agreed to buy Hollowtree pig unit as the basis of a large scale pig fattening venture. When half the village objected he gave the idea up and left Phil struggling for cash to buy his land. 
1980 - p176 increasing sheep to 300, draining new 30 acres, applying for potato quota, failed to get an FHDS grant  (designed for ineffienct farmers). Lilian refused to discus Tony's nee for a silage clamp. p177 Spray drift from one of Brian's fields badly affected Carol's market crops

p179 (chapter by Anthon Parkin - ag advisor writing in 1980s) 
scripts written months in advance, hard to match the weather conditions = complaints from listeners. 
SVD - swine vesicular disease - cropped up for first time in Dec 1972   - obvious subject for inclusion but none knew how long it would last. Every time the MinAg vets announced it was under control it borks out again. Eventually in Nov  we decided to take th plunge. Ministry vets wanted us to do it - put across lots of points they needed to get over. Ib had dramatic potential. But would a disease discussed in Nov 1973 be around in March when scripts were broadcast. Managed to extract a promise from them that whatever happened they would not announce the eradication of SVD until after the Hollowtree outbreak.

p180 strong educational influence - true in the earlier days than it is now, when benefits come was a bonus rather than a prime objective. Programme born as a result of a suggestion made by a farmer at an agricultural meeting called by the BBC to discuss how it could serve farmers better. 

plenty of advice to put over. When Dan and Phil took it in turns solemnly to go through a ministry leaflet on warble fly control para by para, it was not only justified but perfectly acceptable to the listener who wanted to know about the life cycle of the warble fly or if they did not, were happy that someone else upon whom they were depending for their food did.

p183 amazing how similar Phil's routine is in 1980 to Dan's thirty yrs ago... instead of mowing thistles he is more likely to be supervising the mixing of a cocktail of chemical sprays measured to the nearest millilitre which will make sure that not only the thistles but any other unwanted plant is killed. 

p184
alongside debts in ag since 1951 has been the growth in means of communication to farmers which relieved the programme to some extent of its obligations. MinAg advisory team has been matched/overtaken  by those of the commercial firms and marketing organisations. You can have your farm's data put through a computer by ICI, or your dairy her monitored by BOCM-Silcock. Fison will send a man out to tell you if your winter wheat needs spraying and Bibby's expert will call and advise on nutrition. No sugar beet grower looks these days to the archers for tips on pre emergence sprays. He picks up the telephone and gets the fields man from the local sugar factory to drop in. 
Even if no long the centre of ag education, little happens in farming which is nor mirrored there sooner or later. 

p192
stories of programmes impact are legion
throwaway remark by the Ambridge vet to Doris to the effect that a spot of rock sulphur in her dog's water might help him withstand the heat better had a dramatic effect. 'You couldn't get a ha'porth of rock sulphur anywhere by the end of the week'  according to Godfrey Baseley. No one can ever know the effect but think can safely say it was a positive one. 

