http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/advertising_and_society_review/v011/11.1.zayer.html

Browse > Social Sciences > Business and Society > Advertising & Society Review > Volume 11, Issue 1, 2010
A Typology of Men's Conceptualizations of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising
Linda Tuncay Zayer (bio)
Abstract
This study explores men's conceptualizations of ideal masculinity in advertising. Specifically, this research uses a qualitative approach to examine a segment of men who fall into the Generation X cohort. These men, many of whom are Caucasian and single, are largely educated, from the Midwest, and outwardly heterosexual. Exploratory findings reveal the salience of eight themes of ideal masculinity. These include the Adventurer, the Athlete, the Attractive Man, the Daredevil, the Family Man, the Goal-Driven Man, the Individual, and the Strong Man. Three themes exemplifying the antithesis of ideal masculinity—the Player, the Partier, and the Slob—also emerged. This research enhances our knowledge of men's perceptions of ideal masculinity in advertising and provides new insights relative to past research. Findings identify messages that resonate with consumers' lives, as well as illuminate potential social implications.

This study explores men's conceptualizations of ideal masculinity in advertising. Past scholars have explored gender issues and advertising from various perspectives, in a variety of contexts and across disciplines. In fact, while the study of masculinity is prevalent in fields such as advertising, marketing, psychology, feminist theory, and mass communications, much early work in masculinity had its roots in sociology from authors such as Michael Kimmel, R.W. Connell, Harry Brod, and Michael Messner, among others. Moreover, much early discussion in this domain debated and distinguished differences between sex and gender. While sex is a person's biological maleness or femaleness, gender is defined as "the internalized attitudes and behavioral expectations about maleness and femaleness…"1
Masculinity and femininity are fluid concepts that change over time2 through their conceptualization not only by consumers, but also by researchers.3 Until the mid-1970s, these constructs were treated as two bipolar dimensions on a continuum. With the work of Bem4 and Spence, Helmreich, and Strapp,5 masculinity and femininity started to be conceptualized and measured as independent dimensions. Today, gender roles may be defined as a set of culturally derived behaviors associated with masculinity and femininity.6 But what constitutes masculinity has been the point of inquiry for several scholars. Past research has investigated the intersections of masculinity with generational cohort,7 sexuality,8 race,9 ethnicity,10 class,11 and even religion.12 And while some scholars have sought similarities and universal dimensions of gender across cultures,13 most nonessentialist scholars agree that masculinity is culturally dependent and individually situated. That is, masculinity may be conceptualized differently based on the life experiences of the person, and it must be examined in parallel with other structural and sociological factors. Moreover, masculinity may also be expressed by women,14 as there is no absolute link between maleness and masculinity, although this point would be up for debate to scholars who hold the biological perspective of gender.
Since masculinity is influenced by structural factors such as age, race, and education, among others, it is important to situate the context of this study by clearly articulating the subset of men examined for this research. The purpose of this study is to examine how ideal masculinity is conceptualized within the context of advertising by a group of men falling into the Generation X cohort. These men, many of whom are Caucasian and single, are largely educated, from the Midwest, and outwardly heterosexual. In addition, in order to explore the conceptualizations of ideal masculinity in advertising among this group of men, it is useful to provide an overview of research on gendered representations in advertising as a whole.15
Female Sex-Role Stereotyping in Advertising
Gender research in advertising has focused in large part on female sex-role stereotyping. The hundreds of studies in this domain most often employ one of three methods: content analysis, surveys, or experimental research studying the impact of certain portrayals on women. Research utilizing the content analysis method continues to find that women are portrayed in a "traditional" or objectified manner. For example, Courtney and Whipple review research in female stereotyping between 1970 and 1983, and they find that women are mainly portrayed in the home, engaging in domestic tasks, or functioning in decorative roles.16 Klassen, Jasper, and Schwartz examine three magazines (Ms., Playboy, and Newsweek) and also find a disproportionate number of ads portraying women in traditional poses (e.g., caretaker role) relative to ads that show men and women as equals.17 However, they did find an increasing number of portrayals of women in a variety of roles, such as working women. Furnham and Bitar analyze a variety of advertising issues in British television advertising.18 Findings indicate females are more often portrayed in a dependent role in the home and are shown in the younger age group, while males are shown more in middle-aged categories. Along with research examining role portrayals, other researchers have examined how women have been depicted physically. For instance, Signorielli, McLeod, and Healy examine gender portrayals and stereotyping in MTV commercials. They find female characters are more likely depicted as having very fit bodies, rated as more attractive, and are more likely to wear revealing clothing than their male counterparts.19
Browne investigates sex-role stereotyping in television commercials targeted at American and Australian children and finds boys in both countries are shown to be more active, to demonstrate or explain the product, to engage in dominant behaviors, and be featured as "winning."20 In contrast, girls are more often featured as shy, giggling, engaging in face covering, eye aversion, snuggling, and caressing objects gently. O'Barr continues to find similar patterns in today's advertising, such as portrayals of women as less active, more concerned with their appearance, and depicted in a sexualized manner.21 Thus, it is clear that while sex-role stereotyping was first found to be problematic several decades ago as demonstrated by just a handful of the many published studies discussed above, it is still alive and well in today's advertising landscape.
Next, female viewers' attitudes about gender roles have also been assessed through the use of survey research. For instance, Lundstrom and Sciglimpaglia find younger, more educated women, as well as "nontraditional" women, are most troubled with the stereotypical portrayals of women in advertising.22 Similarly, Ford and LaTour find the more autonomous a woman, the more critical she is of female role portrayals in advertising.23
Finally, female role portrayals also have been investigated experimentally in terms of their effectiveness, depending upon the product being advertised, the orientation of the viewer, and the type of role portrayal used. Courtney and Whipple argue that the appropriateness of the portrayal might depend on the product being advertised.24 For example, traditional role portrayals may be looked upon more favorably if the advertisement is for a household cleaning product. Leigh, Rethans, and Whitney find attitudes of both traditional and modern women are more favorable when the role portrayal in the advertisement is consistent with their role orientation.25 Jaffe and Berger find that an egalitarian portrayal, which is characterized as a woman sharing household responsibilities with her husband, is received more favorably than the "superwoman" portrayal, which is characterized as a woman who can successfully balance both work and home on her own.26 In summary, various studies manipulate how the female is portrayed and examine how individuals respond to such depictions based on their attitudinal differences, as well as the appropriateness of the portrayal to the product being advertised.
Men and Masculinity in Advertising
It is important to note that while the study of gender roles in an advertising context has largely focused on women, there has been some exploration of men and masculinity. Many of the studies in advertising and marketing employ a content-analysis method.27 Wolheter and Lammers examine magazine advertisements for the years of 1958, 1968, and 1978.28 The authors find that the portrayal of men in nonworking roles has risen since 1958 and that men are increasingly being depicted in decorative roles. Kolbe and Albanese review images of men who appear alone (i.e., without other models) in advertisements in Business Week, Esquire, GQ, Playboy, Rolling Stone, and Sports Illustrated.29 They find that the majority of the men have the physique of the male icon (e.g., strong, muscular) and display the "cowboy" image (e.g., detached, stoic). Images were also generally upscale, conservative, and conventional in nature. Kaufman examines the portrayals of men in family roles through a content analysis of commercials that aired during football games, daytime and prime time.30 Men are more likely to be shown away from home and less likely inside the home. Childcare (e.g., taking care of sick children, changing diapers, supervising children) is the least common activity portrayed for men. However, men are more likely than women to be shown teaching, reading, and playing with children. Not only are men being portrayed in a stereotypical manner in advertising, but Kacen and Nelson,31 in their replication of two advertising studies, also find that the overall level of sexist portrayals is worse for advertisements featuring men than for women based on a scale assessing sexism.32 The authors use the Scale for Sexism, which evaluates sexism on five levels ranging from a very sexist portrayal to a nonsexist portrayal. They find men are portrayed in Levels 1 and 2 (i.e., men as "decoration" or in traditional roles versus Levels 3, 4, and 5, which are progressive, equal, and nonstereotypic roles) more often than women.
Moving beyond content-analysis studies, Garst and Bodenhausen establish that men's attitudes about their own gender roles are affected by advertising, especially in subjects who hold less "traditional" views on gender.33 More specifically, men who initially hold nontraditional gender role attitudes, such as androgynous men, or men who are high in both masculinity and femininity, endorse more traditional attitudes after exposure to traditionally masculine models. Traditional masculinity may be defined as the historically dominant notions of masculinity in society. However, the authors find that the men do maintain their nontraditional attitudes after exposure to androgynous models. The authors posit that the instability of nontraditional men's gender role attitudes may be due to the fact that they reside in a culture that still highly endorses traditional masculine ideals and that their attitude shifts may be temporary in nature. Most recently, Orth and Holancova investigated the emotional and attitudinal responses of 320 Czech respondents, ages 18-35, to various role portrayals, including traditional and nontraditional depictions of men and women in ads.34 The authors find male consumers prefer depictions showing only male images, while females prefer female-only depictions and least prefer ads depicting the female model in a superior manner to the male model. Moreover, recent research by Schroeder and Zwick has delved deeper into the intersections between advertising representation and masculine identities.35
In summary, research in gender role portrayals in advertising has concentrated on female sex-role stereotyping. Fewer studies examine men and are mostly in the form of content analyses. However, how do men conceptualize depictions of masculinity in advertising? Do the images they are exposed to resonate with their personal beliefs about gender? Moreover, advertisers often try to depict ideal notions of masculinity in order to appeal to the male consumer. But what is ideal to these male consumers? In order to explore these questions more deeply, first a brief overview of idealized advertising is provided.
What Is an Idealized Advertising Image?
Richins describes three characteristics that make up an idealized image. First, such images often depict situations that may be achieved only by an exclusive group in society and are not readily attainable by the masses. For example, depictions in advertising are often of highly attractive individuals, which are a select group in society. Second, idealized media images represent an "almost necessarily edited version of life."36 Ads usually do not show the mundane, the boring, or the unpleasant parts of life. Lastly, modern technology, such as airbrushing techniques, is used to create images of perfection, resulting in standards beyond the reach of any human being.37
It is also important to consider the idiosyncrasies of advertising text in particular. Scott points out that texts differ from each other; subsequently, the reading strategy that a person uses for an ad may be drastically different from strategies used in the reading of novels, for example.38 Moreover, individuals may have several culturally informed expectations when approaching a text. Like all forms of text, advertising has "rules" for reading. For example, the reader approaches an ad with the tacit assumption that the ad is a persuasive attempt. In addition, ads are often invasive events in our everyday lives, filled with gimmicks, glamorized visuals, and slogans to draw the reader's attention. While consumers familiar with these advertising conventions may be resistant to their appeals, nonetheless advertising is a dynamic phenomenon that continuously morphs into new forms to appeal to its intended target.39 Moreover, Scott describes the intimate link between advertising and notions of self, "A key motive for reading advertisements is to 'test' imaginative selves for future adoption and communication through objects. The advertising text, then, becomes an important intermediary between imagination and actualization of self."40
Indeed, idealized images are commonplace in advertising and often draw in consumers in hopes of reaching an ideal self despite some consumers' beliefs that they are not influenced by such images. This has been noted by scholars as the "myth of self-immunity."41 Past research has sought to understand how individuals make comparisons between themselves and the source in the ad, most often in terms of beauty, physical attractiveness, and body shape.42 For example, Richins finds that young women compare themselves to idealized images of physical attractiveness, and this comparison results in raised standards and lowered satisfaction with one's own attractiveness.43 Other research examining the impact of ideal advertising, although much less prevalent, explores men's comparisons to advertising images. Gulas and McKeage incorporate financial success as a part of the model's overall attractiveness and find that exposure to idealized images of high financial success has a negative impact on men's self-evaluations.44
But what do these idealized images mean for society and the individuals who make up this society? Pollay states, "We are all potential victims of the invidious comparisons of reality to the world seen in advertising. Once convinced that the grass is greener elsewhere, one's own life pales in comparison and seems a life half-lived."45
While there has been much debate about this issue, researchers Belk and Pollay state the importance of examining advertising imagery and its linkages to society:
…even if advertising merely reflects the values of the culture and society of which it is part, it has become an important enough reflection of ourselves that it must be regarded as a significant factor in reinforcing and strengthening the life it portrays…Whether advertising imagery reflects the present or the future, it supports an image of society, and that is enough to warrant our attention.46

In summary, past research on idealized images in advertising has focused largely on comparisons of beauty, attractiveness, and body shape and delves into the impact of such images on self-evaluations. However, idealized masculinity has not been widely examined and deserves further attention. The purpose of this study is to illuminate men's perceptions of ideal masculinity in advertising rather than to assess the impact of such images on a person's self-concept. Examining the ideals of masculinity from the consumer's perspective may allow a typology of masculine ideals in advertising to emerge that truly reflects the themes that consumers, rather than researchers, find salient. After all, it is these very interpretations that make up the collective discourses of masculinity in society.
Discourses of Masculinity
In order to shed light on the moving target of masculinity, it is important to acknowledge that current meanings of masculinity are rooted in discourses that were prevalent in the past and still continue today to varying degrees. These discourses include the relationship of masculinity to work outside of the home and being the breadwinner,47 sports and athleticism,48 rowdiness and "rough" masculinity,49 masculinity as homophobia,50 the Peter Pan ethos of fun and frivolity,51 the self-indulgent playboy,52 buddydom,53 telemasculinity,54 rugged individualism,55 and most recently, the man-of-action hero,56 among many other themes. With various discourses moving in and out of prominence, how can researchers begin to understand the meanings of masculinity as situated in advertising? Researchers must look to consumers' lived experiences for insight. Moreover, these meanings will likely change based on the group of men being explored.
One area of research that is central to the current study is the study of gender role norms and ideals. Different conceptualizations have emerged ranging from defining the accepted gender role norms57 to defining masculine ideals.58 A typology of American masculine norms was developed by Harris in his book, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities. He surveyed approximately 500 men of various ages, ethnicities, and class backgrounds in order to develop 24 gender-role messages that men are exposed to in the media, as well as from their community, family and peers. Using factor analysis, he grouped and ranked the norms into five factors in order of importance to men—Standard Bearers, Workers, Lovers, Bosses, and Rugged Individuals. While the Harris typology makes an important contribution in the study of masculinity, it focuses on a survey of norms, not ideals as spoken by the words of consumers themselves. Norms may be different from ideals in that ideals may be defined as notions that encapsulate how one wishes to be, while norms are what one is expected to be. In addition, Harris examines men from a variety of different backgrounds, rather than delving deep into a particular segment of men's experiences of masculinity.
Other scholars have examined gender role ideals and archetypes.59 Most notably, Brannon categorizes masculinity into four roles: No Sissy Stuff, The Big Wheel, The Sturdy Oak, and Give 'Em Hell,60 while Lindsey adds a fifth role, the Macho Man.61 Lindsey maintains that these roles have only intensified since their original conceptualization. However, the typologies of Brannon62 and Lindsey63 are generated from the researcher's perspective. Moreover, the original research was developed over 30 years ago and is undoubtedly outdated as the landscape of gender roles in the United States has changed dramatically since the 1970s. Mangan, for example, points out that even the dominant form of masculinity, hegemonic masculinity, shifts over time. He notes "each historical era produces its own version of hegemonic masculinity, which operates on an external level, in terms of social roles and relations, and on an internal one, in terms of subjectivity, feelings and definitions of self."64
In fact, many practitioners and advertising agencies have attempted to capture the shift in masculine ideologies.65 For example, in one study by the advertising agency Leo Burnett, four out of five men believe that portrayals of men in advertising are out of touch with reality.66 However, despite interest from the advertising practitioner community, no research could be located that provides a typology of masculine ideals in advertising based on consumers' conceptualizations. While one type of masculinity is the ideal according to researcher Erving Goffman—the "young, married, white, urban, northern, heterosexual, Protestant father of college education, fully employed, of good complexion, weight, and height, and a recent record in sports," much in society has changed since the 1960s.67 This research attempts to capture how men today conceptualize ideal masculinity in advertising.
Summary
In summary, little advertising research has sought to understand how men perceive ideal depictions of masculinity. In fact, with few exceptions,68 themes of masculinity in advertising have been much less studied than topics such as female sex stereotyping. Conceptions of ideal masculinity in advertising are critical to understand because advertisers often use idealized depictions to glamorize their products. How and if these images resonate with consumers will likely have a profound impact on their consumer attitudes. Moreover, advertising images serve to reinforce the discourses of masculinity in society, and therefore, it is important to understand how and if men's own conceptualizations of ideal masculinity coincide with or differ from the messages propagated in the marketplace.
Research Question and Method
To address these gaps in the existing literature, an interpretive approach is taken in this research. In this manner, assumptions as to the meanings attributed to ideal masculinity or masculinities are not made by the researcher. Instead, the informants, in their own words, provide insight with respect to their perceptions of masculinity in advertising. To this end, the following research question is offered: (1) How do men conceptualize ideal masculinity in advertising?
Specifically, this research captures the conceptualizations of ideal masculinity in advertising from the viewpoint of Midwestern, Generation X, outwardly heterosexual, educated men, many of whom are Caucasian and single. Much research focuses on the study of "marginalized" masculinities and discusses that white masculinity is defined by the "other." DiPiero states, "…white masculinity causes those identities that it excludes from itself to define it."69 Moreover, he states, "The features that have traditionally not only characterized but distinguished the white male seem no longer important. Possessing physical strength, heading a household, working outside of the home, and having sole access to the most respected and profitable arenas of culture are all features that either no longer pertain exclusively to white males or are no longer particularly valued."70 Thus, besides the concept of exclusion, it is not clear what masculinity means to Caucasian men. Indeed, in a 2003 interview, Michael Kimmel, one of the most prominent theorists on masculinity, states, "We need to study whiteness. We need to study heterosexuality, middle-classness, and masculinity because the center is always invisible…".71
While this study does not focus on the influence of a specific structural factor such as race, education or sexuality, it does delve deeply into a particular segment of men that has not previously been examined extensively with regard to their perceptions of gender ideals in advertising. Twenty Gen X men, or men who were born between 1965 and 1981, were interviewed for this study. In order to determine if the sex of the interviewer might influence the responses of the informants, two Gen X interviewers were utilized (one male, one female). Although the impact of the interviewer's sex on informants' responses is not the central focus of the study, no initial differences in the findings emerged. Each interviewer used a snowballing technique to locate informants for the study. Due to the fact that notions of masculinity may vary across cultures, by age, geography, and sexuality,72 all individuals selected for the study were born and raised in the United States, with the exception of one man who was from Canada. All of the informants' ages were constrained to falling into the Gen X cohort. In this manner, a more intensive investigation into a focused segment of men is provided. In addition, from a business perspective, in 2008, Gen X consumers accounted for over a third of the almost 200 billion dollars in retail sales, just in the online space alone,73 making them an important consumer segment.74 In addition, all of the men resided in the Midwest and were outwardly heterosexual. While most were educated, Caucasian and single, there was some variance across informants in order to examine potential differences across these factors.
This research was conducted using a semi-structured interview format, utilizing ads as projective aids.75 Projection is often used to uncover meanings that are less accessible by more direct measures and is defined as "attributing to others, characteristics individuals cannot or will not see in themselves."76 In addition, in-depth interviews, following the guidelines by McCracken, were used in order to discover the experiences of the individual within broader social and cultural contexts.77 The main aim of this research was to allow the men to express their ideals of masculinity as they experience and conceptualize these ideals. However, the interviewers followed a semi-structured format in order to make comparisons across informants.
During the in-depth interviews, the informants were shown sixteen ads (see Appendix 2). They were then asked to discuss the ads they found as most ideal and least ideal in terms of masculinity. The ads selected for the study first appeared in issues of Playboy, Maxim, Men's Health, ESPN, and Sports Illustrated. These magazines were selected because they constitute the top circulating men's magazines as determined by Advertising Age. The ads were selected based on how well they tapped into a variety of masculine themes identified in past research, as well as if they were indicative of the images that were commonplace in these magazines. In addition, ads were restricted to one full page, and ads that featured celebrities were excluded in an effort to maintain standard ad format and to eliminate possible celebrity ad effects. Moreover, in order to maintain relevance to the topic of masculinity and to the demographic, ad depictions where the male model was not the main focal point and ads for products that did not fit the young male demographic (e.g., ads for Viagra) were also excluded. Also, in order to obtain a range of images, two additional ads from women's magazines were selected.
It is important to note that the set of ads is not exhaustive. However, the point of the research is to present the ads as a starting point for discussion about masculine ideals. In addition, prior to the presentation of the ads, the informants were probed about their general thoughts on ideal masculinity. Thus, conceptualizations of ideal masculinity both in a general sense and in response to particular ads that the men may run into daily were captured by this approach. Moreover, this study is exploratory in nature as little previous work has examined this segment closely with regard to gender and advertising. Therefore, it is appropriate to use an open-ended qualitative approach while utilizing ads as one point of discussion. Appendix 2 depicts the sixteen ads that were used as projective aids in the interviews. Moreover, subsequent to the initial interviews with informants (typically one to one and a half hours in length), a twenty-minute follow-up interview was initiated with the men after a preliminary analysis of the data. This follow-up was conducted in order to further shed light on key issues that emerged during the first interview and to probe again about their general thoughts on ideal masculinity. While the informants were not paid for the interviews, the men's names were entered into a lottery for two gift cards.
Over 300 pages of single-spaced text resulted from the interviews. First, the transcripts were carefully reviewed and read in their entirety to gain a holistic sense of the textual data. All comments from the twenty informants that pertained to the questions of what they believed constitutes ideal masculinity were compiled and compared and then collated and abstracted to the thematic level. The researcher sought out emergent themes in the data, engaging in constant comparison to refine categories and dimensions, while referring to existing theoretical research in this area to find both consistencies and differences with past research—a process called dialectical tacking.78
Findings
Typology of Masculine Ideals in Advertising
Several themes of ideal masculinity emerge from the data and are organized into a typology of these ideals. The development of typologies based on analysis of emergent themes has been a major contribution of past research across a variety of substantive domains such as research on consumer rituals79 and advertising response.80
One of the key aims of the research is to understand how men conceptualize ideals of masculinity: that is, what does "ideal masculinity" mean among this group of informants? While past research has discussed gender role norms for men81 and developed a typology of masculine ideals based on the researcher's perspective,82 to date little research has investigated the meanings of ideal masculinity from the consumer's perspective. A detailed description of the ideal themes that emerged in this study is provided below. While all notions of masculinity are rooted, in part, in past ideologies, the ideals that emerge both as substantially as well as subtly different from research in the last 50 years is discussed first. Next, the ideals that are firmly rooted in past research are examined. The eight emergent themes are listed below:
1.   The Attractive Man is good looking, physically fit, well groomed, and sexy.
2.   The Daredevil is courageous, doesn't mind taking risks and lives a bit on the edge, even if that means he could face danger.
3.   The Family Man is committed to his position in the household, whether it is the role of husband and/or father.
4.   The Goal-Driven Man is determined, mentally strong, and motivated to reach his goals.
5.   The Adventurer engages in adventurous, but not necessarily dangerous, activities.
6.   The Athlete is actively engaged in sports.
7.   The Individual is his own person and likes to stand out.
8.   The Strong Man is physically powerful.
While the typology above captures the essence of ideal masculinity according to the informants, the following three themes emerge as the antithesis of ideal masculinity:
1.   The Partier is out to get drunk and party to excess.
2.   The Player is a womanizer, always out for sex.
3.   The Slob is unattractive and out of shape.
The next section illuminates each of the ideals discussed above and includes a few excerpts from informant interviews. To shed light on the informant's background, each quote will indicate the race, marital status, and age of the man. For example, Andy, a Caucasian, single, 28 year-old man, is indicated as: Andy, CaucSin, 28.
Multidimensional Nature of Ideals
It is also important to note that the eight ideals presented above are not mutually exclusive. In fact, multiple ideals are simultaneously salient to several informants, as men (and women) are multifaceted individuals. That is, no one individual typically has only one goal related to their gender identity (e.g., wanting only to appear attractive). Rather, individuals often pursue multiple identity goals. Moreover, masculinity is complex in nature, and the notions of gender are tightly intertwined with one another. This multidimensionality is further illustrated in the informants' quotes in the following sections. First, each ideal is discussed in detail.
The Attractive Man
The theme of the Attractive Man emerges as salient for several informants. They discuss the importance of attractiveness either in terms of being good looking or having a good physique. Andy, CaucSin, 28, selects the Ralph Lauren Polo ad depicting a man exercising as the one that exemplifies his ideal sense of masculinity. "I chose this one because it's a male working out. He is very fit and I guess the reason I associated with that one would be because I am interested in working out and try to be fit and it portrays a lifestyle that I am looking to achieve."
Figure 1. 
Ralph Lauren Polo ad.
View full resolution
Indeed, several informants described their ideal masculinity in terms of a man being "in shape," "muscular," and "cut." While a muscular build can imply strength as well, it is a component of attractiveness in that a fit body is an attractive body in today's society. The attractiveness theme may be seen in popular culture through the "metrosexual trend" and the plethora of products in the marketplace geared towards men's vanity and appearance. Bordo points to anthropologist Lionel Tiger, who explains this recent trend, "Once men could fairly well control their destiny through providing resources to women, but now that the female is obliged to earn a living, he himself becomes the resource. He becomes his own product: Is he good looking? Does he smell good? Before, when he had to provide for the female, he could have a potbelly. Now he has to appear attractive in a way that the female had to be."83
However, even Bordo points out that it is still largely taboo for men (excluding African-American men) to admit that they are interested in beauty or looking good.84 Moreover, while past research indicates being sexually skillful is a part of masculinity,85 the notion of attractiveness in this study is not necessarily about sexual conquests. In fact, a backlash against being sexually promiscuous is a finding that will be discussed later in this paper. Thus, it is interesting to note that the men in this study unapologetically discuss the desire for an attractive appearance, making it a novel finding and one that is in line with recent societal shifts.
However, it is also possible that since muscularity is closely linked to male physicality, which O'Barr points out is a source of male power,86 the men's interpretations may have an underlying notion of power in addition to a sense of attractiveness. As Bordo points out, "…we need to think about the body not only as a physical entity—which it assuredly is—but also a cultural form that carries meaning with it….when we look at bodies (including in our own mirror), we don't just see biological nature at work, but values and ideals, differences and similarities that culture has 'written' so to speak, on those bodies."87 Indeed, she states a "hard body is a 'take no shit' body."88 Thus, within the ideal of the Attractive Man, several underlying themes may be at work, including attracting the opposite sex and notions of power.
The Daredevil
Another theme that emerges from the text is the Daredevil, or the man who takes risks and lives a bit dangerously. Ozzy, HispSin, 29, discusses how he wishes he were a bit more risk-taking as he describes the man mountain biking in an Element ad, which he ranked as his most ideal depiction of masculinity. "I wish I could…be strong enough to be able to do that…have that attitude where I could take dangerous risk[s] up there."
Figure 2. 
Element ad.
View full resolution
The emergence of the Daredevil is not surprising considering the rise in the consumption of high-risk activities.89 Moreover, Celsi et al. note in their study on skydiving consumption that one of the motives of such consumption is identity construction.90
The Family Man
Another novel theme that emerges from the text is the Family Man ideal. This ideal is captured through the role of either loving husband or father. Tom, AfrAmSin, 28, selects the Eternity ad depicting a family as exemplifying his ideal of masculinity.
Figure 3. 
Calvin Klein Eternity ad.
View full resolution
I wouldn't look at this and say he's a player. Because a player would probably not be there, he'd already be gone. But he's holding her hand, which shows he loves her, and she's got her head on his chest so she feels like she's protected when she is with him….then you see "love sweet love," [copy of the ad] and think hey I'm that guy…I am still a family guy and I am still a good guy. So that's why I look at this as masculinity. Being hot, being desirable, being sexy, being a father, being a husband. Even if you just look at him in this picture, it's almost like he's a lion on all fours, with his daughters on his shoulders and kids are up under him, very protective.

Tom's comments indicate that in addition to the ideal of being a father and husband, or the Family Man, the salience of the Attractive Man can be seen as well through his desire to be seen as "hot," and "sexy." Interestingly, he relies on a very traditional masculine analogy of a lion protecting his lioness and cubs to situate the picture in the ad.
While family life is often associated with the feminine domain, such as, for example, Hirschman's identification of the Mother/Nurturant Goddess archetype in 1960s media, the theme of the Family Man is not surprising, considering the current social landscape.91 The emergence of the Family Man flows logically from the fact that several societal shifts, such as the rise in the number of working women, have caused men to take on new responsibilities within the home.92 According to the U.S. Census Bureau, almost two in every ten single-parent households were maintained by men in 2000. Yet, as recent as the typology of gender role norms by Harris, men were described as wanting to avoid the reins of domesticity.93 Despite its name, the Faithful Husband in the Harris typology is described as the man who relinquishes his freedom upon marriage. While this theme does not depict the role of husband in a positive manner, the Family Man, by contrast, is one of the most salient positive ideals expressed by the informants. Interestingly, advertising and media have been slow to depict men as fathers in male-directed media. Even the ad used for this study, which depicts what appears to be a family, is one of two ads taken from a women's magazine.
The Goal-Driven Man
While some informants discuss physical characteristics and roles, other informants talk more about behavioral aspects of ideal masculinity. The Goal-Driven Man is often discussed in terms of men's setting goals and being determined to reach those goals. Scott, CaucSin, 25, refers to an Air Force ad showing a man doing sit-ups as exemplifying his ideal sense of masculinity.
Figure 4. 
U.S. Air Force Reserve ad.
View full resolution
Interviewer: Can you talk a little about the way the man is portrayed?

Scott: Just from the advertisement, just looking at him I would say, he's in pretty good darn shape. He's looking straight ahead, like he's got some direction. He's got some goals. He's got something in mind and he's going to go out and do it.

Interviewer: How come you rated this as most ideal? Like what appeals to you about this ad?

Scott: The most ideal, just because it's simple and it's not saying you're a sex symbol. It's not saying you're the sharpest guy...It's just saying you're motivated. You're goal driven.

Scott's comments indicate that a man does not necessarily have to be sexy or intelligent, as long as he is motivated to reach his goals. Thus, the Goal-Driven Man emphasizes the importance of reaching goals as a part of masculinity. While overcoming obstacles and being the best you can be is seen in the Hurdles and Be the Best You Can norms of the Harris typology, the Goal-Driven Man moves beyond simply overcoming hurdles and striving for perfection.94 This ideal includes determination, mental strength, and motivation in reaching goals—whatever they may be. That is, the goal is not to necessarily be the best, but instead the importance is placed on the actual process and effort displayed in striving for goals.
While the previous four themes are novel to varying degrees, additional components of masculinity emerge from the text that are firmly rooted in masculine ideologies of the past. These include the Adventurer, the Athlete, the Individual, and the Strong Man.
The Adventurer
As the name describes, the theme of the Adventurer arose from the informants' emphasis on experiencing adventures in life. Mike, CaucSin, 27, touches upon the Adventurer as his ideal when he selects an ad depicting a man drinking Hennessey and containing ad copy that states he has ridden a motorcycle across Route 66. He states, "…'ridden a motorcycle across Route 66'…I wish…I was in a position to do more stuff like that, kind of adventurous stuff. I'm probably more conservative…I guess maybe that side of his personality [the model's], maybe I wish I had a little more."
Figure 5. 
Hennessey ad.
View full resolution
Adventure as associated with gender has been identified by Harris in his research on gender role norms, although he links adventure with danger.95 In the current typology, the Adventurer ideal is not necessarily perceived by informants as being associated with danger or risks (although danger and risk do emerge in the Daredevil ideal discussed above). However, underlying this theme of adventure could be connections to a theme of masculinity called telemasculinity, or the enactment of masculinity through action, adventure, competition, aggression and the consumption of "male toys" such as cars and guns.96 In Mike's response above, for example, it clear that the male "toy" of the motorcycle is essential to the adventure on Route 66.
The Athlete
The Athlete, or the man who is actively involved in sports, is a theme that is salient for several informants. Jason, CaucSin, 26, selects an Amber Rock ad showing a rugby game as his ideal in terms of masculinity. "It's really the sense that rugby is a very masculine game…typically rugby has been a rough, challenging sport and a lot of big guys play it and a lot of people get hurt playing it…getting dirty and bloody and it's just a really rough sport. So yeah, I think…Sports [has] typically been masculine." Jason's comments also allude to the fact that not only is engaging in sports an ideal, but a sense of danger, or getting hurt, makes a sport that much more masculine. He later states, "Basketball is a masculine sport, but it's not compared with rugby." In their study of organized sports and gender, Fischer and Gainer also find differences in the perceptions of the masculinity of various sports activities (e.g., biking versus boxing).97 Moreover, several past researchers have noted the importance of sports to a man's sense of masculinity.98 Indeed, Harris captures the norm of the Sportsman, or the man who learns about winning and competition, which is akin to the Athlete in the emergent typology.99
Figure 6. 
Amber Rock ad.
View full resolution
The Individual
The Individual is a theme that is also well rooted in American history and emerges from informants' emphasizing that a masculine man is a person who stands on his own. Mick, CaucMar, 25, selects a Corona ad depicting a surfer in a crowd of businesspeople as his ideal. "I guess in my opinion, masculinity is sort of stand[ing] out being your own person."
Figure 7. 
Corona ad.
View full resolution
Bruce, CaucSin, 28, echoes this sense of individuality as he ranks an Air Force ad as his ideal. Interestingly, for Bruce, individuality is a type of reward for hard work and teamwork. "My thinking in it is that it kind of portrays a hard worker…as well with this one it says that you are a team player and you work hard to help the team together and in the long run that pays off and it gives you the ability to kind of break out on your own and do your own thing." The theme of individuality and nonconformity can also be seen in the Harris typology of norms that includes the Rebel. However, the Individual differs from the Rebel because it does not encompass actively resisting authority, but rather it emphasizes being one's own person. In addition, notions of individualism may also be closely associated with authenticity, a notion which has previously been linked with masculinity.100
The Strong Man
Physical strength exemplified in the Strong Man ideal also emerges as a theme in the text. Jordan, AsianAmSin, 24, ranks an Air Force ad as his ideal because, "He's definitely portrayed as powerful. Powerful, strong and you can also say he is portrayed as brave in this scenario." Again, it is important to note the multidimensional nature of masculinity, as several ideals—being strong and brave—are linked together for Jordan.
Bobby, CaucSin, 30, discusses how he identifies with a Bud Light ad. He describes the man as "Strong, I would actually have said masculine...sexy, strong, physical….I sometimes wish I was more physical. This is going to sound dorky, but more sexy." Here, Bobby seems to link strength with physicality and sexiness, thus touching on the ideal of the Attractive Man as well.
Figure 8. 
Bud Light ad.
View full resolution
Antithesis of Ideal Masculinity
While several of the emergent themes have roots in past research, few studies examine the antithesis of ideal masculinity. The current research uncovered the themes of the Partier, the Player, and the Slob (utilizing the terms that consumers used themselves) as less than ideal depictions and ones from which men wanted to disassociate themselves. It is interesting to note that the Player and the Partier depictions are observed frequently in the sample of magazine ads that were surveyed for this study. However, despite the use of such depictions by advertisers, informants surprisingly seem to deem them as less desirable representations of ideal masculinity and are in many instances turned off by such images. For example, Ozzy, HispSin, 29, is turned off by a Corona ad, ranking it as his least ideal. "It's kind of like they're trying to say he's a partier or that type of guy." The interviewer asks: So how do you feel about that? "I think it's a negative ad…you don't have to drink to be free or be different or have fun."
The Player is another depiction that many men criticize. Larry, CaucEng, 25, discusses a Bud Light ad, "You have a guy [hitting on] a girl. Apparently [he] doesn't need to know her name…I think he's sleazy…I think it sends a bad message. It also is [the] kind of person I don't want to be and I never try to be."
The Slob is another theme that emerges out of the text as the antithesis of ideal masculinity. This is not surprising since the Attractive Man is found to be an ideal. Joe, CaucSin, 34, ranks the Lipton ad depicting a married couple as his least ideal. "I don't want to say he's heavy set, but he's certainly not an in-shape guy and I think he kind of looks corny. I think he is one of those types of people that he probably gets more by on his humor than his looks…"
Figure 9. 
Lipton Tea ad.
View full resolution
While it is useful to gain an understanding of the emergent typology of masculine ideals, it is also critical to compare and contrast it to typologies developed by past researchers. The next section will compare the emergent typology against the Brannon101 and Lindsey102 typologies of ideal masculinity.
Comparison of Emergent Typology to Prior Typology of Ideal Masculinity
One of the most widely cited typologies of masculine ideals holds that there are five ideals of masculinity, including No Sissy Stuff, the antifeminine ideal; the Big Wheel, the idea that money makes the man; the Macho Man, the emphasis on sexual conquests; Give 'Em Hell, the ideal of violence and aggression; and the Sturdy Oak, the aura of toughness.103 There are some overlaps between this typology and the new typology developed from the current research. However, it is important to note the current typology speaks to ideals in advertising whereas the Brannon typology assesses masculinity in a general sense. While advertising ideals and societal ideals are intimately connected, it is nevertheless important to distinguish the two typologies.
First, the informants mentioned nearly all of the characteristics used in the Brannon/Lindsey typology. However, there are substantial differences between the two. The starkest contrast is the notion that the Player, which is akin to the Macho Man in the Brannon/Lindsey typology, is not expressed as an ideal of masculinity, but rather as the antithesis of masculinity. While this ideal has roots even back to the 1950s with the "playboy," the derogation of this type of masculinity and the emergence of the Family Man reflect the dynamic nature of gender roles. Alternatively, inherent in these ideals may be a tension between how men may act in certain situations or certain points in their lives and how they ideally would like to be.
Other differences between the current findings and the Brannon/Lindsey typology are also apparent. For example, no informants mentioned the ideal of violence as exemplified by the Give 'Em Hell ideal. The only comment made by an informant that could be interpreted with regard to that dimension was Jason's description of rugby as a very masculine sport and one that is "dirty and bloody." In addition, rather than success, status, and money exemplifying an ideal as Brannon's Big Wheel suggests, informants in this study opted to express hard work and achievement through the Goal-Driven Man. In this ideal, the central focus is more on being determined and motivated to reach goals, whatever they may be, rather than a focus on money. This goal-driven behavior could be indicative of a man-of-action ideal previously identified by past marketing researchers. Holt and Thompson, in their study of the everyday consumption of men, discuss how men create a man-of-action ideal (such as the entrepreneur) as a way to resolve the tensions between two ideals of masculinity—the rebel and the breadwinner.104 Indeed, Gen Xers in general have been noted for their entrepreneurial spirit.105
Next, while the notion that men should not be feminine (No Sissy Stuff ideal by Brannon) did surface in some of the text, it did not constitute a central theme. This may be due to the fact it is more acceptable in today's society to display "feminine" characteristics, such as sensitivity, than in the past.106 Finally, the Sturdy Oak characteristics of toughness, confidence, and self-reliance are observed in the text. However, these characteristics are not often mentioned together as a unified ideal.
In summary, there are substantial differences between the typology that emerges from the current research and the typology developed by Brannon and updated by Lindsey. Two of the most commonly mentioned ideals in society, the breadwinner and the playboy, both of which were included in the Brannon/Lindsey typology through the Big Wheel and Macho Man, are not salient ideals for the informants in this study. This finding is not surprising, as the original typology was developed over three decades ago and was conceptualized from the researcher's perspective, not from the consumer's viewpoint.
Implications and Future Research
In conclusion, while some of the themes observed in the current study are prevalent in past research, there are several significant differences. These differences highlight the importance of enhancing our knowledge in the area of gender, as it is constantly a moving target. While exploratory in nature, this research identifies eight themes that appeal to men and three themes advertisers should be careful of employing in their advertising. For example, the Family Man was positively received and conceptualized by nearly all of the informants as ideal. This is especially noteworthy, as a majority of the informants are single. Depictions such as the Family Man not only portray an ideal that appeals to consumers, but one that is positive for society as a whole.
Moreover, ideals such as the Attractive Man should be viewed with caution. There have been hundreds of articles published on the potentially adverse effects of thin and beautiful models on the self-esteem of women. However, relatively little research explores men's experiences of idealized messages of masculinity. Recent research has shown that men may feel a sense of vulnerability in their responses to idealized masculine images.107 Thus, it is important to understand the potential "unintended consequences," of such ideals, which seem to have firmly taken root in the masculine discourses of Gen X men.108 In addition, depictions such as the Player and the Partier may turn some consumers off through what is perceived as a negative message about how men should behave. Thus, advertisers must tread cautiously if they decide to reiterate such messages in society. Moreover, additional research should investigate this segment of consumers more deeply, as well as explore other segments of men and women. In addition, using various methods and analyzing different advertising mediums will fine-tune our understanding of the meanings attributed to ideals of gender in advertising.
Linda Tuncay Zayer  
Linda Tuncay Zayer is Assistant Professor of Marketing in the School of Business Administration at Loyola University Chicago. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, her M.B.A. from the University of Notre Dame, and her undergraduate business degree from Indiana University. Her research interests include gender issues as it relates to identity, persuasion, and shopping behavior. She has been published in the Journal of Consumer Research, Journal of Retailing, among others.

Appendix 1
Biographical sketch of informants

Informant Pseudonym	Biographical Information
            Andy	Andy is a 28-year-old single, Caucasian man who resides in a suburb of a large Midwestern city. He has completed some graduate school and works in business earning $50-75K.
            Bob	Bob is a 26-year-old single, Caucasian man who resides in a large Midwestern city. He has a college degree and works in consulting earning between $50-75K.
            Bobby	Bobby is a 30-year-old single, Caucasian man who lives in a large Midwestern city. He has a college degree and works in business earning between $75-100K.
            Bruce	Bruce is a 28-year-old single, Caucasian man living in a suburb of a large Midwestern city. He has a graduate degree and earns between $50-75K in the field of business.
            Chris	Chris is a 22-year-old single, Caucasian man who lives in the rural Midwest. He has some college education and earns less than $25K a year.
            Doug	Doug is a 27-year-old Caucasian man who is engaged to be married. He resides in the rural Midwest, has a graduate degree, and makes an income of $75-100K in business.
            Gary	Gary is a 28-year-old single, Caucasian man who lives in a large Midwestern city. He has a college degree and works in business earning between $25-50K.
            Jason	Jason is a 26-year-old single, Caucasian man who resides in a large Midwestern city. He has a college degree and works in the public sector, earning between $25-50K.Note: In the follow-up interview, Jason was engaged to be married.
            Joe	Joe is a 34-year-old single, Caucasian man who lives in a suburb of a large Midwestern city. He has a college degree and works in the technology industry earning $25-50K.
            Jordan	Jordan is a 24-year-old single, Asian American man who lives in a suburb of a large Midwestern city. He has a college degree and works in technology earning between $25-50K.
            Larry	Larry is a 25-year-old Caucasian man who is engaged to be married and resides in a large Midwestern city. He is earning his graduate degree and has an income of less than $25K. Note: In the follow-up interview, Larry had completed his graduate degree and was working full-time in a mid-sized city in the Midwest.
            Luther	Luther is a 25-year-old single, Caucasian man who resides in the rural Midwest. He has a college degree and works in business earning less than $25K a year.
            Mick	Mick is a 25-year-old married, Caucasian man who lives in the rural Midwest. He is earning his graduate degree and is in the military earning over $100K. Note: In the follow-up interview, Mick was working full time in the military and had completed his graduate degree. He had also moved to a large city in the Southeast.
            Mike	Mike is a 27-year-old single, Caucasian man who lives in a large Midwestern city. He has a graduate degree and works in finance earning less than $25K a year.
            Neil	Neil is a 24-year-old Caucasian, single man who resides in a suburb of a large Midwestern city. He has a graduate degree and works in technology earning an income of between $25- 50K.
            Paul	Paul is a 28-year-old Caucasian man who is married with two children. He lives in a suburb of a large Midwestern city, has a college degree, and works in technology earning between $50-75K.
            Pete	Pete is a 23-year-old single, Caucasian man who lives in the rural Midwest. He is earning his graduate degree and has an income of over $100K.
            Ron	Ron is a 29-year-old, single, Hispanic man who resides in the rural Midwest. He works in the public sector earning between $25-50K.
            Scott	Scott is a 25-year-old single, Caucasian man who resides in the rural Midwest. He is earning a graduate degree and is in the military, earning between $50-75K. Note: In the follow-up interview, Scott was working full time in the military and had completed his graduate degree. He also moved to a large city on the West Coast.
            Tom	Tom is a 28-year-old single, African American man who resides in a large Midwestern city. He has a college degree and works in business earning between $50-75K.
            Victor	Victor is a 29-year-old single, Hispanic man who lives in a large Midwestern City. He has a college education and works in business earning $50-75K.
Appendix 2
Ads used as projective aids.

Figure 1. 

Rider ad.

View full resolution

Figure 2. 

Lipton tea ad.

View full resolution

Figure 3. 

Bud Light ad.

View full resolution

Figure 4. 

Amber Rock ad.

View full resolution

Figure 5. 

Cuervo ad.

View full resolution

Figure 6. 

Air Force Reserve ad.

View full resolution

Figure 7. 

Element ad.

View full resolution

Figure 8. 

Corona Light ad.

View full resolution

Figure 9. 

Pioneer ad.

View full resolution

Figure 10. 

Lipton Iced Tea ad.

View full resolution

Figure 11. 

Cuervo ad.

View full resolution

Figure 12. 

Polo Ralph Lauren ad.

View full resolution

Figure 13. 

Calvin Klein Eternity for Men ad.

View full resolution

Figure 14. 

U.S. Army ad.

View full resolution

Figure 15. 

Degree ad.

View full resolution

Figure 16. 

Hennessy ad.

View full resolution

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the reviewers of this paper for their helpful comments, as well as Cele C. Otnes, Madhu Viswanathan, Abbie Griffin, Elizabeth Hirschman, and Lan Chaplin for their feedback on earlier versions of this paper.

References
Batra, Rajeev and Morris B. Holbrook. "Developing a Typology of Affective Responses to Advertising." Psychology & Marketing 7, no. 1 (1990). [CrossRef]
Belk, Russell and Richard Pollay. "Materialism and Magazine Advertising During the Twentieth Century." In Advances in Consumer Research, eds. Elizabeth Hirschman and Morris Holbrook, no. 12, 394-98. Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1985.
Bem, Sandra L. "The Measurement of Psychological Androgyny." Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 42, no. 2 (1974): 155-62. [CrossRef]
Beynon, John. Masculinities and Culture. Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press, 2002.
Bordo, Susan. The Male Body: A New Look at Men in Public and in Private. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1999.
Bourke, Joanna. Dismembering the Male: Men's Bodies, Britain and the Great War. London: Reaktion, 1996.
Bower, Amanda. "Highly Attractive Models in Advertising and the Women Who Loathe Them: The Implications of Negative Affect for Spokesperson Effectiveness." Journal of Advertising 3 (Fall 2001): 51-63.
Boyarin, Daniel. Unheroic Conduct: The Rise of Heterosexuality and the Invention of the Jewish Man. Berkeley and London: University of California Press, 1997.
Brannon, Robert. "The Male Sex Role: Our Culture's Blueprint of Manhood and What It's Done for Us Lately." In The 49% Majority, eds. D. David and R. Brannon, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1976.
Breward, Christopher. The Hidden Consumer: Masculinities, Fashion and City Life 1860-1914. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1999.
Browne, Beverly. "Gender Stereotypes in Advertising on Children's Television in the 1990s: A Cross-National Analysis." Journal of Advertising 27, no. 1 (1998): 83-96.
Celsi, Richard, Randall Rose, and Thomas Leigh. "An Exploration of High-Risk Leisure Consumption through Skydiving." Journal of Consumer Research 20, no. 1 (1993): 1-23. [CrossRef]
Courtney, Alice E. and Thomas W. Whipple. Sex Stereotyping in Advertising. D.C. Lexington, MA: Heath and Company, 1983.
Courtney, Alice E. and Thomas W. Whipple. "Female Role Portrayals in Advertising and Communication Effectiveness: A Review." Journal of Advertising 14, no. 3 (1995): 4-17.
DiPiero, Thomas. White Men Aren't. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002.
Doyle, James A. The Male Experience. Dubuque, IA: Wm. C. Brown, 1995.
Fiske, John. Television Culture, London: Methuen, 1987.
Fischer, Eileen and Brenda Gainer. "Masculinity and the Consumption of Organized Sports." In Gender Issues in Consumer Behavior, ed. Janeen Arnold Costa, 84-103. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1994.
Ford, John B. and Michael S. LaTour. "Differing Reactions to Female Role Portrayals in Advertising." Journal of Advertising Research 5 (September/October 1993): 43-52.
Forrest, David. "'We're Here, We're Queer and We're Not Going Shopping': Changing Gay Male Identities in Contemporary Britain." In Dislocating Masculinity: Comparative Ethnographies, eds. Andrea Cornwall and Nancy Lindisfarne. London: Routledge, 1994.
Furnham, Adrian and Nadine Bitar. "The Stereotyped Portrayal of Men and Women in British Television Advertisements." Sex Roles 29, nos. 3/4 (1993): 297-311.
Garst, Jennifer and Galen V. Bodenhausen. "Advertising Effects on Men's Gender Role Attitudes." Sex Roles 36, nos. 9/10 (1997): 551-73.
Geertz, Clifford. Local Knowledge. New York: Basic Books, 1983.
Gergen, David. "Shattering Expectations." U.S. News & World Report, December 11, 2005, http://www.usnews.com/usnews/biztech/articles/051219/19gergen.htm.
Gilmore, David. Manhood in Making, Cultural Concepts of Masculinity. New Haven & London: Yale University Press, 1990.
Goffman, Erving. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1963.
Gulas, Charles S. and Kim McKeage. "Extending Social Comparison: An Examination of the Unintended Consequences of Idealized Advertising Imagery." Journal of Advertising 29, no. 2 (2000): 17-28.
Halberstam, Judith. Female Masculinity. Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press, 1998.
Harris, Ian. Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities. London: Taylor and Francis, 1995.
Hirschman, Elizabeth. Heroes, Monsters & Messiahs. Kansas City, MO: Andrews McMeel Publishing, 2000.
Hirschman, Elizabeth. "Men, Dogs, Guns, and Cars: The Semiotics of Rugged Individualism." Journal of Advertising 32, no. 1 (2003): 23-33.
Holt, Douglas. "Interview with Steven Jackson." Advertising & Society Review 4, no. 2 (2003). [Project MUSE]
Holt, Douglas B. and Craig J. Thompson. "Man-of-Action Heroes: The Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption." Journal of Consumer Research 31 (September 2004): 425-40. [CrossRef]
Irwin, Robert McKee. Mexican Masculinities. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2003.
Jaffe, Lynn J. and Paul D. Berger. "The Effect of Modern Female Sex Role Portrayals on Advertising Effectiveness." Journal of Advertising Research 34, no. 4 (1994).
Jargon, Julie. "She knows her men," Chicago Business, October 16, 2006, http://www.chicagobusiness.com/cgi-bin/article.pl?article_id=26654.
Kacen, Jacqueline J. and Michelle Nelson. "We've Come a Long Way, Baby—or Have We? Sexism in Advertising Revisited." In Proceedings of the Sixth ACR Gender, Marketing and Consumer Behavior Conference, eds. Pauline Maclaran and Elizabeth Tissier Desbordes, 291-308. Association for Consumer Research, 2002.
Kaufman, Gayle. "The Portrayal of Men's Family Roles in Television Commercials." Sex Roles 41, nos. 5/6 (1999): 439-58.
Kimmel, Michael. "Masculinity as Homophobia." In Theorizing Masculinities, ed. Harry Bod and Michael Kaufman, 119-41. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994.
Klassen, Michael L., Cynthia R. Jasper, and Anne M. Schwartz. "Men and Women: Images of their Relationships in Magazine Advertisements." Journal of Advertising Research 33, no. 2 (1993): 30-40.
Kolbe, Richard H. and Paul J. Albanese. "Man to Man: A Content Analysis of Sole-Male Images in Male Audience Magazines." Journal of Advertising 4 (Winter 1996): 1-20.
Leigh, Thomas W., Arno J. Rethans, and Tamatha Reichenbach Whitney. "Role Portrayals of Women in Advertising: Cognitive Responses and Advertising Effectiveness." Journal of Advertising Research 27, no. 5 (1987): 54-63.
Lindsey, Linda L. Gender Roles. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc, 1997.
Lundstrom, William J. and Donald Sciglimpaglia. "Sex-Role Portrayals in Advertising." Journal of Marketing 41 (July 1977): 72-79. [CrossRef]
Mangan, Michael. Staging Masculinities: History, Gender, Performance. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
Martin, Mary C. and Patricia F. Kennedy. "The Measurement of Social Comparison to Advertising Models: A Gender Gap Revealed." In Gender Issues in Consumer Behavior, ed. Janeen Arnold Costa, 104-24. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994.
McCracken, Grant. The Long Interview. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1988.
McGrath, Mary Ann, John F. Sherry, Jr., and Sidney J. Levy. "Giving Voice to the Gift: The Use of Projective Techniques to Recover Lost Meanings." Journal of Consumer Psychology 2, no. 2 (1993): 171-91. [CrossRef]
Messner, Michael. Power at Play. Boston, MA: Beacon, 1992.
Meyer, Stephen. "Work, Play, Power: Masculine Culture on the Automotive Shop Floor, 1930-1960." In Boys and Their Toys, ed. Roger Horowitz, 13-32. New York, NY: Routledge, 2001.
Moore, Robert and Douglas Gillette. King, Warrior, Magician, and Lover: Rediscovering the Archetypes of the Mature Masculine. New York, NY: Harper, 1990.
Mulpuru, Sucharita. "Benchmark 2008: The Web Purchasing Power of Gen X." Forrester, July 25, 2008. http://www.forrester.com/Research/Document/Excerpt/0,7211,46580,00.html.
O'Barr, William. "Interview with Michael Kimmel." Advertising & Society Review 4, no. 2 (2003). [Project MUSE]
O'Barr, William. "Representations of Masculinity and Femininity in Advertisements." Advertising & Society Review 7, no. 2 (2006).
Oldenziel, Ruth. "Boys and Their Toys: The Fisher Body Craftman's Guild, 1930-1968, and the Making of a Male Technical Domain." In Boys and Their Toys, edited by Roger Horowitz, 139-68. New York, NY: Routledge, 2001.
Orth, Ulrich and Denisa Holancova. "Consumer Response to Sex Role Portrayals in Advertisements: Effects of Incongruity and Prejudices on Emotions and Attitudes." Journal of Advertising 32, no. 4 (2004): 77-90.
Osgerby, Bill. Playboys in Paradise. New York, NY: Oxford International Publishers, 2001.
Otnes, Cele, Tina M. Lowrey, and Young Chan Kim. "Gift Selection for Easy and Difficult Recipients: A Social Roles Interpretation." Journal of Consumer Research 20, no. 2 (1993): 229-45. [CrossRef]
Palan, Kay M. "Gender Identity in Consumer Behavior: A Literature Review and Research Agenda." Academy of Marketing Science Review (Online) 1, no. 10 (2001): 1-37.
Pingree, Suzanne, Robert P. Hawkins, Matilda Butler, and William Paisley. "Equality in Advertising A Scale for Sexism." Journal of Communications 26, no. 4 (1976): 193-201. [CrossRef]
Pleck, Joseph and Edward H. Thompson. "The structure of male role norms." American Behavioral Scientist 29, no. 5 (1986): 531-43. [CrossRef]
Pollay, Richard W. "The Distorted Mirror: Reflections on the Unintended Consequences of Advertising." Journal of Marketing 50, no. 2 (1986): 18-36. [CrossRef]
Pollay, Richard W. and Katherine Gallagher. "Advertising and cultural values: Reflections in the 'distorted mirror'." International Journal of Advertising 9, no. 4 (1990): 359-72.
Register, Woody. "Everyday Peter Pans: Work, Manhood, and Consumption in Urban America, 1900-1930." In Boys and Their Toys, ed. Roger Horowitz, 199-228. New York, NY: Routledge, 2001.
Richins, Marsha. "Social Comparison and the Idealized Images of Advertising." Journal of Consumer Research 18 (June 1991): 71-83. [CrossRef]
Richins, Marsha. "Materialism, Desire, and Discontent." In Marketing and Consumer Research in the Public Interest, ed. Ronald Paul Hill, 109-32. London: Sage, 1995.
Ruth, Julie, Cele Otnes, and Frédéric Brunel. "Gift Receipt and the Reformulation of Interpersonal Relationships." Journal of Consumer Research 25 (March 1999): 385-402. [CrossRef]
Sabo, Don. "Pigskin, Patriarchy, and Pain." In Men's Lives, eds. Michael Kimmel and Michael Messner. New York, NY: Macmillan, 1992.
Salzman, Marian, Ira Matathia, and Ann O'Reilly. The Future of Men: The Rise of the Ubersexual and What He Means for Marketing Today. Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Schroeder, Jonathan and Detlev Zwick. "Mirrors of Masculinity: Representation and Identity in Advertising Images." Consumption, Markets and Culture 7, no. 1 (2004): 21-52. [CrossRef]
Scott, Linda. "The Bridge from Text to Mind: Adapting Reader-Response Theory to Consumer Research." Journal of Consumer Research 21 (December 1994): 461-80. [CrossRef]
Scott, Julie-Ann and Nicole E. Cloud. "A Focus Group Analysis of the Campaign for Real Beauty." Advertising & Society Review 9, no. 4 (2008).
Signorielli, Nancy, Douglas McLeod, and Elaine Healy. "Gender Stereotypes in MTV Commercials: The Beat Goes On." Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media 38, no. 1 (1994): 91-101.
Smith, Tyson. "Pumping Irony: The Construction of Masculinity in a Post-feminist Advertising Campaign." Advertising & Society Review 6, no. 3 (2005). [Project MUSE]
Spence, Janet T., Robert Helmreich, and Joy Strapp. "Ratings of Self and Peers on Sex-Role Attributes and Their Relation to Self-Esteem and Conceptions of Masculinity and Femininity." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32 (1975): 29-39. [CrossRef]
Stephens, Debra, Ronald Paul Hill, Suraj Commuri, and James W. Gentry. "Issues of Control in Two Extreme Household Types." Asia Pacific Advances in Consumer Research 4 (2001): 355-61.
Stephens, Debra Lynn, Ronald Paul Hill, and Cynthia Hanson. "The Beauty Myth and Female Consumers: The Controversial Role of Advertising." Journal of Consumer Affairs 28, no. 1 (1994): 137-53.
Strauss, Anselm and Juliet Corbin. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory, Second Edition. Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1998.
Suzik, Jeffrey Ryan. "Building Better Men: The CCC Boy and the Changing Social Ideal of Manliness." In Boys and Their Toys, ed. Roger Horowitz, 111-38. New York, NY: Routledge, 2001.
Tompkins, Jane. Reader-Response Criticism. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD, 1980.
Tuncay, Linda. "Men's Responses to Depictions of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising." In Advances in Consumer Research 33, eds. Cornelia Pechmann and Linda L. Price, 63. Association for Consumer Research, 2006.
White, William. "Interviewing Strategies and Tactics," In Learning from the Field, 97-112. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1984.
William, John and Deborah Best. Measuring Sex Stereotypes: A Thirty-nation Study. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1982.
Wolheter, Maralinda and H. Bruce Lammers. "An Analysis of Male Roles in Print Advertisements over a 20 Year Span: 1958-1978." In Advances in Consumer Research 7, ed. Jerry Olson, 760-61. Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research, 1980.
Notes
1. O'Barr, "Representations of Masculinity and Femininity in Advertisements."

2. Doyle, The Male Experience.

3. See Bourke, Dismembering the Male for discussion of predominant perspectives on masculinity.

4. Bem, "The Measurement of Psychological Androgyny."

5. Spence, Helmreich, and Strapp, "Ratings of Self and Peers on Sex-Role Attributes."

6. Palan, "Gender Identity in Consumer Behavior."

7. Tuncay, "Men's Responses to Depictions of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising."

8. Forrest, "'We're Here, We're Queer and We're Not Going Shopping.'"

9. DiPiero, White Men Aren't.

10. Irwin, Mexican Masculinities.

11. Breward, The Hidden Consumer; Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes."

12. Boyarin, Unheroic Conduct.

13. Gilmore, Manhood in Making; William and Best, Measuring Sex Stereotypes.

14. See Halberstam, Female Masculinity.

15. However, see O'Barr, "Representations of Masculinity and Femininity in Advertisements" for a more extensive review of masculinity and femininity in ads.

16. Courtney and Whipple, Sex Stereotyping in Advertising.

17. Klassen, Jasper, and Schwartz, "Men and Women: Images of their Relationships."

18. Furnham and Bitar, "The Stereotyped Portrayal of Men and Women in British Television Advertisements."

19. Signorielli, McLeod, and Healy, "Gender Stereotypes in MTV Commercials."

20. Browne, "Gender Stereotypes in Advertising on Children's Television in the 1990s."

21. O'Barr, "Representations of Masculinity and Femininity in Advertisements."

22. Lundstrom and Sciglimpaglia, "Sex-Role Portrayals in Advertising."

23. Ford and LaTour, "Differing Reactions to Female Role Portrayals in Advertising."

24. Courtney and Whipple, "Female Role Portrayals in Advertising."

25. Leigh, Rethans, and Whitney, "Role Portrayals of Women in Advertising."

26. Jaffe and Berger, "The Effect of Modern Female Sex Role Portrayals on Advertising Effectiveness."

27. See Kaufman, "The Portrayal of Men's Family Roles in Television Commercials"; Kolbe and Albanese, "Man to Man"; Wolheter and Lammers, "An Analysis of Male Roles in Print Advertisements."

28. Wolheter and Lammers, "An Analysis of Male Roles in Print Advertisements."

29. Kolbe and Albanese, "Man to Man."

30. Kaufman, "The Portrayal of Men's Family Roles in Television Commercials."

31. Kacen and Nelson, "We've Come A Long Way, Baby—or Have We?"

32. Pingree, Hawkins, Butler, Paisley, "Equality in Advertising A Scale for Sexism."

33. Garst and Bodenhausen, "Advertising Effects on Men's Gender Role Attitudes."

34. Orth and Holancova, "Consumer Response to Sex Role Portrayals in Advertisements."

35. See Schroeder's and Zwick's discussion on the discourse of advertising representation and identity and how ads depicting masculine images create social signifiers in society, "Mirrors of Masculinity."

36. Richins, "Materialism, Desire, and Discontent," 112.

37. Richins, "Materialism, Desire, and Discontent."

38. Scott, "The Bridge from Text to Mind."

39. Scott, "The Bridge from Text to Mind."

40. Scott, "The Bridge from Text to Mind," 473.

41. Pollay and Gallagher, "Advertising and cultural values."

42. See Richins, "Social Comparison and the Idealized Images of Advertising"; Martin and Kennedy, "The Measurement of Social Comparison to Advertising Models"; Stephens, Hill, and Hanson, "The Beauty Myth and Female Consumers"; Bower, "Highly Attractive Models in Advertising and the Women Who Loathe Them"; Scott and Cloud, "A Focus Group Analysis of the Campaign for Real Beauty."

43. Richins, "Social Comparison and the Idealized Images of Advertising."

44. Gulas and McKeage, "Extending Social Comparison."

45. Pollay, "The Distorted Mirror," 27.

46. Belk and Pollay, "Materialism and Magazine Advertising During the Twentieth Century," 888.

47. See, for example, Oldenziel, "Boys and Their Toys" or Suzik, "Building Better Men."

48. Sabo, "Pigskin, Patriarchy, and Pain"; Messner, Power at Play.

49. Meyer, "Work, Play, Power: Masculine Culture."

50. Kimmel, "Masculinity as Homophobia."

51. Register, "Everyday Peter Pans."

52. Osgerby, Playboys in Paradise.

53. Beynon, Masculinities and Culture.

54. Fiske, Television Culture.

55. Hirschman, "Men, Dogs, Guns, and Cars."

56. Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes."

57. Harris, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities.

58. See, for example, Brannon, "The Male Sex Role"; Lindsey, Gender Roles.

59. Brannon, "The Male Sex Role"; Lindsey, Gender Roles ; Moore and Gillette, King, Warrior, Magician and Lover; Pleck and Thompson, "The structure of male role norms."

60. Brannon, "The Male Sex Role."

61. Lindsey, Gender Roles.

62. Brannon, "The Male Sex Role."

63. Lindsey, Gender Roles.

64. Mangan, Staging Masculinities: History, Gender, Performance, 13.

65. Salzman, Matathia, and O'Reilly, The Future of Men.

66. Jargon, "She knows her men."

67. Erving Goffman , Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity, 128.

68. See, for example, Bordo, The Male Body: A New Look at Men in Public and in Private; Gulas and McKeage, "Extending Social Comparison"; Hirschman, "Men, Dogs, Guns, and Cars"; Schroeder and Zwick, "Mirrors of Masculinity"; Smith, "Pumping Irony: The Construction of Masculinity in a Post-feminist Advertising Campaign"; O'Barr, "Representations of Masculinity and Femininity in Advertisements."

69. DiPiero, White Men Aren't, 12.

70. DiPiero, White Men Aren't, 2.

71. O'Barr, "Interview with Michael Kimmel."

72. Beynon, Masculinities and Culture.

73. Mulpuru, "Benchmark 2008: The Web Purchasing Power of Gen X."

74. Please see Appendix 1 for further information on the male informants.

75. White, "Interviewing Strategies and Tactics"; McGrath, Sherry, and Levy, "Giving Voice to the Gift."

76. McGrath, Sherry, and Levy, "Giving Voice to the Gift," 172.

77. McCracken, The Long Interview.

78. Geertz, Local Knowledge.

79. See, for example, Otnes, Lowrey, and Kim, "Gift Selection for Easy and Difficult Recipients"; Ruth, Otnes, and Brunel, "Gift Receipt and the Reformulation of Interpersonal Relationships."

80. See, for example, Batra and Holbrook, "Developing a Typology of Affective Responses to Advertising."

81. Harris, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities.

82. Brannon, "The Male Sex Role."

83. Bordo, The Male Body: A New Look at Men in Public and in Private, 220.

84. Bordo, The Male Body: A New Look at Men in Public and in Private.

85. See, for example, Lindsey, Gender Roles and Harris, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities.

86. O'Barr, "Representations of Masculinity and Femininity in Advertisements."

87. Bordo, The Male Body: A New Look at Men in Public and in Private, 26.

88. Bordo, The Male Body: A New Look at Men in Public and in Private, 57.

89. Celsi, Rose, and Leigh, "An Exploration of High-Risk Leisure Consumption through Skydiving."

90. Celsi et al., "An Exploration of High-Risk Leisure Consumption through Skydiving."

91. Hirschman, Heroes, Monsters & Messiahs.

92. See, for example, research that has investigated households where the woman is the primary breadwinner by Stephens, Hill, Commuri, and Gentry, "Issues of Control in Two Extreme Household Types."

93. Harris, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities.

94. Harris, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities.

95. Harris, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities.

96. Fiske, Television Culture.

97. Fischer and Gainer, "Masculinity and the Consumption of Organized Sports."

98. See, for example, Goffman, Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity; Lindsey, Gender Roles; Messner, Power at Play; Sabo, "Pigskin, Patriarchy, and Pain."

99. Harris, Messages Men Hear: Constructing Masculinities.

100. Tuncay, "Men's Response to Depictions of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising"; Holt's 2003 interview with advertising executive Steven Jackson, "Interview with Steven Jackson."

101. Brannon, "The Male Sex Role."

102. Lindsey, Gender Roles.

103. Brannon, "The Male Sex Role"; updated by Lindsey, Gender Roles.

104. Holt and Thompson, "Man-of-Action Heroes."

105. Gergen, "Shattering expectations."

106. Lindsey, Gender Roles.

106. Gergen, "Shattering expectations."

106. Lindsey, Gender Roles.

107. Tuncay, "Men's Responses to Depictions of Ideal Masculinity in Advertising."

108. Pollay, "The Distorted Mirror."

Copyright © 2010 The Advertising Educational Foundation, Inc.
Advertising & Society Review
Volume 11, Issue 1, 2010

Research Areas
Social Sciences > Business and Society
Recommend
Email a link to this page
  
View Citation
Save Citation
Subject Headings
Men -- United States -- Attitudes.
Masculinity in advertising.
Related Content
<i>A Handbook of Transport Economics</i> ed. by Andre de Palma et al. (review) 
A Handbook of Transport Economics ed. by Andre de Palma et al. (review) 
Advancing Singapore-China Economic Relations 
Advancing Singapore-China Economic Relations 
Deconstructing Hegemonic Masculinity: Understanding Representations of Black and White Manhood in Print Advertising 
Deconstructing Hegemonic Masculinity: Understanding Representations of Black and White Manhood in Print Advertising 
You have access to this content
Free sample
Open Access
Restricted Access
Welcome to Project MUSE

Use the Search box at the top of the page to find book and journal content. Refine results with the filtering options on the left side of the results page. Use the Browse box to browse a selection of books and journals.

Connect with Project MUSE

Join our Facebook Page
Follow us on Twitter
Project MUSE | 2715 North Charles Street | Baltimore, Maryland USA 21218 | (410) 516-6989 | About | Contact | Help | Tools | Order

©2014 Project MUSE. Produced by The Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Milton S. Eisenhower Library.