1) Introduction: the theme of the paper/chapter needs to be more clearly and strongly linked to the subject of the thesis, i.e. the shift from simple/unmixed to ready mixed/branded chemicals, how the users adapted to this and how their relationship to chemistry may have changed in the process. So in the case of paraquat: where does it fit in within this shift, i.e. in relation to sodium chlorate? 
		For some farmers and gardeners, paraquat provided an alternative to arsenical weedkillers and sodium chlorate. The arsenical weedkillers were plentiful and cheap, but very toxic. Sodium chlorate again was availble readily, FIND OUT COSTS, but very long lasting. 
		As paraquat fulfilled a different role, it co-existed on the shelves with sodium chlorate - they were both useful in different situations. 
		What is interesting to me about brand names and chemical names is that even though ICI gave their products brand names, it is always referred to in gardening columns and newspapers as paraquat first and foremost, sometimes only, without the brand-name being given at all.
		I have not yet found a sodium chlorate weedkiller that doesn't say or pretends it isn't sodium chlorate. Here the chemical name seems to act as strongly as a brand name. 
		I found an interesting advert for a weedkiller called DeeWeed in the 1980s that proclaimed it was not paraquat and it was not sodium chlorate (neither was it dioxin, which could be a contaminant of 2, 4, 5 T and 2,4 -D, and the Italian dioxin disaster was still in public's attention).
		
2) Main body of text: I suggest you start with a history of chemicals used in gardening, then sodium chlorate, and then the development of paraquat at ICI. 
	I am not certain that I want to do this for the chapter at least - I think that the history of chemicals in gardening is part of the contextual chapter, followed by a mini case study of sodium chlorate, which links to the main paraquat study.  A condensed history/ mention of chemicals used in gardening might be able to fit in the talk - 20 minutes is a really short time. 

	i) How did they see the market for garden chemicals, and how did they plan to expand it? So something on their marketing strategy for paraquat would be useful here (as a branded chemical, was it presented as more effective, safer than the unbranded sodium chlorate, etc.?).

	This is a good reminder that I really need to find some information on the marketing of garden chemicals, because this is really not described well in the Kennedy book, or the one about Jealott's hill, or anywhere I have seen so far as it is skirted round in the MAFF files. Having said that, there might be 'enough' there in the forrespondance when they're trying to get approval through for the product. Maybe it could be linked to expanding the market for the product, seeing as there are only so many farmers and they are restricting the product to them, denying it to the amateur user, there could even have been some issue of responsibility to the amateur user, to try to prevent them from trying to get hold of the very strong stuff. 

3) Your section on imagined users would follow well from there.

4) Contrast this with the real users, and what they did with paraquat.
	I could definitely include my hunch about class and wealth - looking at the coroners records in the MAFF files, and there comments associated with them, shows that the accidents happening with Gramoxone involve working class, poorer people. This fits with what Vicky Holmes has been saying about the hidden dangers of the home, not really being so much about the middle and upper because they could afford the safer products more easily. 


5) Then perhaps say something about how the market for gardening products was regulated at the time, and how regulation changed as a result of paraquat and other potentially dangerous chemicals being used/misused?

This is logical, though I think that the bulk of the regulatory details should probably go into the contextual chapter. 

6) Conclusion: what does the case of paraquat tell us about users and their relationship to chemicals/chemistry. In what way might this relationship be different from users of other domestic technologies? Is there anything distinctive about the period we are looking at, since the use of garden chemicals has a long history? Does the shift from unbranded/branded chemicals present us with something different/new? 

	I think I am groping towards an idea that the increased communication about gardening chemicals - e.g. in magazines, radio, TV, newspapers, including consumer reviews. People tend to be appalled that when there must be so many ways of testing safety, and there are regulations in place, they don't appear to do the job they were meant to. There were dangerous garden chemicals available before then, but perhaps there wasn't the volume of outcry about the problems they caused. I think the most distinctive thing about the time is probably the consumer movement - which is looking at safety, value for money. Though there might also be an element of environmentalism - no need to use chemicals which we don't really understand. The fact that paraquat was released to the farming population at the same time as Silent Spring was. 
