From Evidence to Market
Viviane Quirke

Kennedy says that main reason for ICI's success in pharma was commercial - expertise in organic chemistry was unrivalled, cornered market for antimalarials in the Empire/ Commonwealth. As this shrank, they needed to change direction. 

Garnet Davey: research director
it was clear that we would have to go into what I would call the diseases of dysfunction, the ones that affected wester civilisation: heart problems, arthritis, hypertension. 

infectious diseases were being tacked through prevention/ immunisation programmes
NHS made it profitable to look at chronic diseases. 

late entry into pharma, expertise inherited from Dyestuffs. 

p648
Dr FL Rose - azo dye chemist joined ICI in 1932, transferred to Medicinal Chemicals Section (inside the Dyestuffs division) when it was created in1936 - synthesised Sulphamezathine - less toxic than May and Baker's 693 Sulphapyridiene, so widely adopted by the medical profession. 

antimalarials - crack German patents, devise process for drugs that were only made in Germany inc Pamaquin and Mepacrine, for which ICI was requested by the Govt to find replacement. 

p649
1942: profits from antimalarials establish a selling company and enter the field of veterinary medicine. Also significant as UK-US antimalarial research programme was initiated under the coordination of the 2 national MRCs. ICI heavily involved. Develop new drug, easy to synthesise, acts as prophylactic, different to many of the compounds in use at the time. 

Team developed Paludrine by 1945, used extensively in the Malysian campaign. 
Joined collaborative scheme to mfc penicillin - Theraputic Research Corporation  - set up penicillin plat at Trafford Park, which became an agency factory. 
ICI had twenty five agency factories, ICI were the British goats largest wartime industrial agent. 

p650
clinical observations of the hypotensive side effects of some antimalarials provided leads in the devt of anti hypertensive agents. 
offshoot of antimalarial - Hibitane as same sort of chemistry. 

outcome of the war was the links built between ICI ad govt agencies, esp MRC. Sir Edward Mellanby as accompany consultant after his retirement. ICI cultivated good relations with the Ministry of Health. Soughtafter partners in a number of nationwide collaborative schemes. 

ICI provided anaesthetists with specially purified trichloroethylene, Trilene, and continued research on the area. Explosions related to increasing use of leecrical devices in surgery,  MinHealth consulted MRC, recommended search for non volatile anaesthetic. ICI invited by MRC to join co operative scheme in 1955. ICI had anticipated the Ministry's recommendations and were already in progress with halo than (Fluothane) synthesised in 1953 by Suckling, recruited to Mond Division in 1942 to work on fluorine gases for Tube Alloys Project. 

1944 set up separate Pharmceuticals division, slow movement to independence as Dystuffs was in control of research l abs and mfc plant until 1955

Spinks surveyed causes of death to identify where drugs might be needed, but also included consideration of chronicity = mass market. 

surveyed prescription forms - see what was being prescribed in 1949  - hypnotics and sedatives at the top, cardiac drugs quite infrequently. Antimalarials, antihelminics (things ICI had earmarked for work) were prescribed rarely, all grouped together as misc. 

Cardiovascular research high on US agenda where weigh influence is from industry to universities, whereas the in UK influence is the othre way. 
p661
1955 - formation of new unit. 
1957 - opening of Alderley Park and Pharmaceutical broke away from Dyestuffs
p162
1958 - James Black arrived, radical departure from the approach adopted by most pharm companies to heart disease. Dept had been preparing to alter course, but Black really pushed it harder. 

Black was protected from opposition to his approach, when he turned problem on its head and looked to decreasing the demand of oxygen from he heart. Able to test ideas unhindered in early states. Within 2 yrs, had developed clinically effective product - Alderlin. small scale trials in 1961 and launched in 1963. Withdrawn when shown to cause thymic tumours in mice. Replaced by Inderal which was synthesises during screening, tested in 1962 and marketed in 1965. Showing some really quick turnaround times. became preferred tmt for angina pectoris and cardiac arethythmias, later used in tmt of hypertension after founding the clinic that it reduced blood pressure. 

p664
beta blockers emerged from appraisal of the potentials of the market for drugs, contributed to changing the market itself by creating new categories of disease and by creating new needs. 

ICI benefited from close contacts with community of cardiologist, keen to test and adopt their drugs. Though hypertension (point of entry) was impt topic for a number of British pharm cos in the 1950s, who could also have taken adv  of the cardiologists. 


p665
this essay has shown that ICI whose synthetic chemical capability was unrivalled int he UK had one of the earliest and best articulated cardiovascular programmes within a broader programme of research into chronic disease. This ensured good fit between ICI's sci, tech and commercial objectives. 

Company had access to wide pool of talent through their cultivation of links with universities. Being a govt industrial agent meant that they could recruit top quality scientists who might otherwise have not turned to industry, but this could be seen as part of War Effort. 

distinctive management culture had developed within ICI between 1942 and 1958. Research directors could if they saw fit, protect their researchers against opposition form their superiors. (see Reader organisational chart p 