Wall,, the photographic darkroom
published 1934

p3
brings up ventilation pretty soon - page three - 

ill ventilated room ion reacts on the operator causing lassitude and headache
vitiated air
ventilation must be balanced with darkness - lots of advice to paint inside

p12
if the stock of chemicals is kept in the bath room the labels on the bottles should be varnished or they will soon fall off under th action of the steam of a hot bath

p44 storage and handling of chemicals
lots of info about covering bottles with dark paper

poisonous chems - often recommend that they should be kept under lock and key. Safetst. but it assumes that the darkroom is open to anyone and everyone which should not be the case. If all photographic chemicals that are poisonous are to be thus kept it will mean the majority of those used. 
May be advisable to prevent to ready access to such chems as mercuric chloride and potassium cyanide. 
p46
writer has adopted a dodge which is some safeguard. All such chemicals are provided with a glued on red paper coring andy he labels are written with the chemical symbols. the idea is that any unauthorised person gain gin access to the room will learn little from such a label as HgCl2 or  KCN. while th efull title might convey full information. 

true poisons only if large enough dose is taken, probably many would be surprised at the names if such a list were given. (does not give list, none the wiser)

absobptio n by the skin - a gt deal of unnec fuss has been made of this for except in dinficid cases there is littlr or nothing to be feared by the average worker who one may rightly assume does not deliberately soak his hands in the solns for hours.  Even mercuric chloride - which is the one chem agains t which we are specially warned is comparatively harmless. This salt is one of the best disinfectants that we have and is largely used in sugary for open wounds for months at a time without slightest ill effects. 

pot cyanide - annother claimed for absorption, little fact for this. more dangerous through breathing, very readily decomposed by an acid and gives of hydrocyanic acid vapour probably the most deadly poison we have. 
p47 - on som people has rapid effect - Faintness, frontal headache. should be used as little as poss, never in small tightly closed room. Its photographic action is never required in he dark, so that one can always open up the door or even work with it outside the dark room. 

lots about how to get stoppers and corks out of bottles

labelling - and concern about illegibility
when pouring soon, cover label to proven soon running down and causing illegibility
Ground glass patch
make own using sodium fluoride, then bathe in acid. 

least satisfactory to label in ink 0 copying ink pencils are worse. 

white adhesive tape, written on with ordinary inko r lead pencil, remains legible. 

p53
worst place to store sensitive materials is the darkroom
starboard of plate boxes good at absorbing water from air
put these in a bimetal lid, with calcium chloride . better to devote some corner of a clothes closet for papers. 

Nothing about branded chemicals, or reputable photographic dealers etc.