Women and Families
An oral history 
Elizabeth Roberts

p32Myrdal and Klein
"domeestic work is expanded to an almost unlimited degree and these is sufficient evidence to justify the suspicion that housewives often unconsciously expand it in order to allay their feelings of frustration by providing evidence that they are fully occupied and indispensable. "

p33 Caroline Davidson writing about women in the 1940s was curious about why the majority of women did the washing at home rather than sending it out. Cost, but Davidson suggestd "If cleanliness is next to Godliness, women wanted to create that mora worth with their own hands'

p34
Children and housework
some women felt children's homework was more important, others believed it was their responsibility as they were at home. Others regretted that they had to do so much housework when thy were young wanted to spare their children and allow them to have a better time. Mrs Peel had 4 children in the 1940s and 50s: no nnever no. Because when I was a youngster I used to have to do quite a bit of work in the house esp when my mother took in boarders. And I always thought 'Well, if they go out to work and if they got out to school and do their homework they have done enough. I just used to get on with everything myself. No, I had no help iwht the hw off the girls or off the boys'
Mrs Critcheyls 3 children born in the 50s - 
I... didn't think that they could do it like I did it, which isn't a good way to be. I'd rather do it myself because they don't do it right. 

Mrs Warick unique in believing that her mother had been too soft with her and her sisters. '... when we left school, we used to do our own ironing and shopping on a Saturday and that was it'
of her own children 'I always used to make tham wash up, but that started when James was in the Cubs. And they would keep their own rooms tidy'

p36
Mr Rowlandsaon grew up in the 40s-50s 
speaking about his father, what he did about the house ' Everything really, deoraintg, repairing things, ike most men do. He built the green house and the garden shed. He did all the gardening of course' Did he do housework? 'Oh no.'

Mr Graveson, asked about his father 'if he picked up a duster he was in trouble.... he had his clear and his gardens (he had a pt job as a gardner). But no, he wasn't allowedto do anything in the house. 

p224
although Roberts discusses the uptake of mechanical appliances among neighbours, there is no mention of the effect of neighbours, ro social contact (e.g. in corner shop) on buying chemicals or cleaning products. 

No mention of environmental chemicals, or household products at all. 
