Selling Smells
Scent Home

 I'm really pleased to be here with this work in progress, part of my PhD is called Chemicals and their users in the British home, 1930 to the 1980s. My aim was to treat chemical aids, such as chemical cleaners, stain removers and weedkillers, as technologies and I wanted the work to complement existing studies of mechanical technologies of the home. Household and garden chemicals are all entwined with smells of some kind. 
 
 Today, I want to look more closely at air fresheners in general, with a particular focus on the bathroom, one of the homes' most anxiety inducing areas with regard to odours.

Suellen Hoye notes that in the United States, products for freshening and cleaning the air began to multiply in the 1950s. Marten and Scott in their survey of the British magazine Good housekeeping, observed this explosion of products too. That's not to say that people didn't care before the 1950s; Ozono promised to freshen and purify air in specifically lavatories, but they saw an extra application specific to war time, which was the Anderson Shelter. Experiences of confined spaces with other bodies could well have had a lasting effect for feelings of stuffiness or bad odours. 

*Is this to do with what chemistry can offer, or is it to do with what people want?*

Even when we have moved beyond the miasma theory of disease, that disease is caused by bad air, interpreting bad smells as a potential threat to health is no bad thing. When dealing with threats, microbes, too small not visible to the naked eye, an olfactory signal is very helpful. Interpreting bad smells is something that is learned, not necessarily something that is innate or universal. Fecal smells are repulsive, at least to most adults, but even this is something learned as we grow up. As more and more houses had inside toilets, there was an attendant problem that smells which could emanate from the bathroom could invade the entire house. 

Environmental olfactory impression management is the term given to maintaining control of the smell of rooms, through air fresheners and cleaning to remove the source of the smell. Unclean smells are instantly recognisable as such, so carries meaning that people can quickly form judgements about. Managing these smells demonstrates an awareness of the rules of decorum, they show consideration for others as well as self respect. 

Cleaning deodorises and also re-odorises. Cleaning products may have their own smell, such as carbolic or pine oil which is inherent to the active ingredient of a disinfectant and is difficult to cover up perhaps, or an additional fragrance can be added to a product that has little identifiable smell, the only function of which is to be smelt. Jeypine was advertised as being available with other more pleasant floral smells, which they implied were the reason housewives preferred their product. [Martens and Scott p388] The replacement of dirty smells, whether of grease, stale smoke with clean smells signifies that cleaning has taken place. Adding smell is another way of the work that has been done being noticed, so not only does something look clean, anyone who has not seen the cleaning take place can't help detecting it with the always active nose. Having housework "noticed" is an important area, a theme which Jessamyn Neuhaus pulls out in her examination of housework and housewives in American Advertising. 

In the move from buying simple chemicals, such as washing soda crystals, to buying packaged, specialised preparations, there was also a move to products with smells of their own, and scented products.  
 
 We can see from this 1935 market survey carried out on behalf of Reckitts who made the toilet cleaner harpic, that soda and soap are rarely used, with most people using a disinfectant, cleanser or scourer. In the reasons for using Harpic, smell is not listed, only that it is a good or satisfactory cleanser, or habit. There are also interesting variations of mixtures or extended methods using sequences of cleanser that people have developed in their own homes. [HAT 50/1/147/3/2/7 Lavatory Cleaner Survey No. 556 7 Jan 1960 p1] Reckitts however, were keen to improve the aesthetic value of this product by giving it a pleasant smell of its own. [B. Reckit p83]. 
 
Even though a lot of behind the scenes effort went into developing a perfume blend that would stand up to the acidity of Harpic, they did not elaborate on this aspect of the product in their adverts. The senses are directed to the clean visual brightness of the toilet, rather than the smell. Perhaps they were too polite to mention this obvious issue. The focus is on that deadly S-bend with its lurking germs, where you can't see or reach with a brush. The message is to use Harpic every day, although the adverts claim that all it takes a '5 second sprinkle' which is left overnight and flushed in the morning. Note that this isn't a measurement that you can check in any other way, but is entirely dependent on the product packaging, with the sprinkle cap and the contents determining how much actually comes out. The danger with this type of measurement is that you could use too scant an amount, and the acidity generated wouldn't be enough to break down the germ-hiding limescale. This 1950 advert tells users and  potential users, that a new perfumed variant "with fresh fragrance" was being marketed, although the un-perfumed kind was still available. 

Where the importance of clean smells was really hammered home was in adverts for the multi surface cleaner Zal, which use dramatic story like adverts.  They use the device of a more Zal-experienced person ,who doesn't necessarily have to be older, as we can see in this advert where the daughter Linda who uses Zal at work, persuades her mother to use Zal at home. 

Fairly grown up, engaged Linda is living at home but doesn't make product choices or do the housework, which is left to her mother. Once her mother starts using Zal, Linda's embarrassment at the "stuffiness" of the house dissipates and she can bring fiancé Noel to the family home. The mother is relieved and happy, vowing to continue using Zal. 

Stuffiness could be solved by more thorough airing of the house, perhaps cracking open a window. Airing a room will get rid of body odours and emanations quite fast.  However, that wouldn't sell very much Zal. 

In the 1952 there was a smoke fog episode that killed thousands of people, and in 1956 there was a smog that was deemed even worse, stretching from the South Coast up to Yorkshire. Smog wasn't just an outdoor problem, it seeped into people's homes, the particulates settling on surfaces and the gases generally contributing to poor indoor air quality. Perhaps keeping your window shut and bringing pine fresh smells in to it was the better option if you lived in an urban area. 

Stuffiness also has an additional meaning, to hint that the existing cleaning routine was old fashioned. In using Zal, the routine is updated and modernised. 

Another advert in the series has Jacinth's mother enlighten her about the product, perhaps again showing that the daughter was uninvolved in housework while living at home. Newly wed Jacinth had recently moved into her own home and was faced with husband Derek staying out later and later. During a tearful telephone call to her mother (again, a modern convenience - when did telephones become common?) the older woman suggests the reason for the husband's behaviour, one that she had noticed too. She brings Zal to the house and together cleanse the sink, drains, floors and paintwork - the adverts are careful to list all the places that the product can and should be used - and the daughter is educated by her mother into doing things that she had just not noticed while living at home. Quite a lot of physical work has to go into making the entire house smell pine fresh. 

Here we get to the reason why smelling piney fresh is best - it is because Germs mean smells. "Haven't you noticed?" about being noticed but also about not being able to ones finger on it. 

With the smelly germs banished by Zal, the relationship improved: Derek is always home early now and he praises Jacinth for keeping it fresh and lovely. This is better than not saying anything about it at all.

These exhortations for daily use were not just shaping perceptions of cleanliness, but were also protecting the manufacturer, as preparations tended to deteriorate the longer they were open, with the chemicals quietly reacting away and losing their potency in the process. If an infrequent user formed the impression of an inefficient product, it was possibly that the level of soil was too great for the amount of active ingredient left in the small amount of product to cope with.  
 
Scent communicated that a cleaning action had taken place. Scents communicated that this was not just something you could buy more cheaply in a less designed form.  Adding a scent required modern chemical techniques [The {perfumed} blend has taken a considerable amount of laboratory work to evolve because of the simple fact that there are a very limited number of perfumes which will stand up to the acidity of Harpic HAT SO/1/147/3/2/7, letter to WT Soper, JWalter Thompson from GD Richardson, Reckitt & Sons Ltd, 06.12.66] were employed to scientifically enhance speed or ease the cleaner of the toilet's task, thereby making that user and their home, modern. So, adding a scent was adding value in a number of ways. 


I suspect that (bathroom) interior design choices also have an impact on the perceived needs and solutions to those needs. The entry of plastics and soft furnishings into the bathrooms gives a whole load of new surfaces and therefore cleaning requirements. Carpets can get wet with water and smell musty, or wet with other things and smell, awful. With more textiles that smells can cling to, the need for an air freshener increases. Here we face another problem, that of masking smells rather than eliminating them, taking the lazy or easy way, where the smell of clean is not really a smell of someone caring about cleanliness but only a superficial nod to cleanliness.
 

Smelling municipal or medical would be things to avoid in a domestic product, some people associate the overpowering smell of cleaners with illness and sickness, visits to hospitals.  

Perhaps mentioning germs in the context of the toilet is too indelicate, but this is really 



smell = care but Conflict with squirting smell to mask/cover - air fresheners?

Not only could products make your home smell fresh, they would improve your relationships.


independent standards - keeping up with the Jones' no longer applicable (Friedan p173)
professionalisation = smell = choosing the right tools for the job (Friedan, p173-4)

in Married to the Mop Jessamyn Neuhaus notes that Suellen Hoy found that products that claimed to clean the air in the home began to multiply in the 1950s

"Growing sensitivity to smells also prompted homemakers to enlist themselves in a "clean fight" against "indoor odours" - household foes that seemed nearly as disturbing and pervasive as germs. Magazine advertisements and television commercials illustrated how unpleasant aromas presented "so many chances to offend". Cooking, bathroom, perspiration, smoking and refrigerator doors were only a few of many that might embarrass or disgust family and friends. Thus "smart" housewives bought an excess of "freshening" products tackled all those jobs nobody liked, and killed unwanted odours." (p202)

Almost every type of housework related product had at one time or another highlighted the elimination of offensive household odours. 

"nothing like the smell of sunshine on clean laundry"
"smelling like a breath of fresh air"

p204
Lysol and other all purpose cleaners and disinfectants made up majority of air freshening products. Though in the late 70s and rapidly growing, the number and variety of air fresheners expanded to today's vast assortment. 

p205

Incensed: Food smells and ethnic tension
Benjamin Aldes Wurgaft
Gastronomica: The Journal of Food and Culture, Vol. 6, No. 2 (Spring 2006), pp. 57-60
p57 history of racisim is full of complaints about the way that a particular group's cooking smells. Xenophobia fuelled by smell-based slurs. 
p59 Jay Geller p211 "The aromatics of jewish difference" in Jews and Other differences: the new jewish cultural studies "Pleasant smells do not exist as part of the urban landscape"
p60 - unlike vision, but like taste, smell is a physical penetration into the body
Smell is more like hearing it its passivity, its nature as a channel of vulnerability, a mechanism by which we both know our environment and know that we are at its mercy. 


 I used to work at the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester, where the gallery Underground Manchester is a perennial favourite especially with young visitors.  For people who have yet to visit, it's a gallery running the length of the basement of the Station Master's House, which charts the domestic health issue of clean water and sewerage, its sponsored by United Utilities. The centre piece is a length of mocked up sewer, complete with stuffed rats and sewer smell (actually "farmyard manure" by Dale Air). Visitors sometimes struggle to find it because as far as they're concerned its The Sewers they're looking for on the museum map, not Underground Manchester. 
 
 There's also a good selection of privies and bathrooms, a noisy tippler toilet and laundry equipment. The subject matter gives a really great range of opportunities for the use of smells, but the convoluted, sometimes hot and stuffy atmosphere can get somewhat claustrophobic and could be sensorily overwhelming. 









 
  
 
 
 
 
