**The Guardian (London)

December 10, 1984**

Guardian Women: Tales from the Powder Room / Interview with Bernadette, drug dealer

BYLINE: By MOYRA DOORLY

LENGTH: 920 words

'I don't worry about the police, I've stopped doing that. What worries me is that someone's going to kick down my door, stick a gun in my face and demand all my money.'

Bernadette says there are worse occupational hazards and that at 26 she knows more about the business of illegally supplying controlled drugs and how to stay in it than most. She worked her way up from the small time - selling pounds 5 worth of cannabis to friends - to supplying pounds of it to other dealers, and cocaine to stock-brokers and every other rich young thing living on the King's Road. 'I just know the rules.'

The first of those is No Heroin because it's a killer, the penalties are too severe and the mere mention of the stuff conjures up too many images of sordid deaths in public lavatories and congregations of skeletal adolescents in dark corners of Southwark housing estates, so the image is all wrong. Bernadette likes to move in the best circles, where the best customers are.

Rule number two is Stay In The Background. This involves letting as few people as possible know what you're up to, 'When I moved on from small dealing I told most of my customers I was giving it up. But I'd worked it so that some people would take quarter pounds and supply to the people I'd been selling to before.' It also involves trying to ensure that those who do know never meet.

Bernadette owns a pleasant five-roomed flat in a passable area of North London - it doesn't pay to be too ostentatious when proof of additional earnings don't exist - and she needs the extra space for business. 'I might have three big customers here, each in separate rooms. There's no reason why they should get to know one another. It can be a bit hectic. I like to make them feel at home, so Ronnie serves the drinks. 'Ronnie is one of Bernadette's gofers - she has at least two more - and he doubles as general house boy and courier. 'Customers only make deals here. Then Ronnie picks it up from another address, delivers it and comes back with the money. I only keep samples here.'

Having another source of income is crucial because nothing is more likely to attract unwelcomed attention than living quite comfortably thank you with no visable means of support. So Bernadette buys the odd piece of furniture here and there with the help of Ronnie and Co, who not surprisingly do most of the heavy work. 'That way I can pass off my extra cash as the profit from goods bought and sold. My parents have an antique shop so i know all the tricks. It's no good being unemployed and driving around in a Trans Am or a Merc the way some people do, especially the black dealers.'

This point introduces rule three which is Never Do Business With Black Men. 'Sounds racist doesn't it, but it's a fact of life. They're trouble, they'll rip you off without thinking about it and probably with a gun in their hand.'

Bernadette has been out in the rain a long time - her own words - which roughly translated means she has taken care of herself from an early age. 'I left home at sixteen, I couldn't stand it any longer so I moved in with my boyfriend who used to import. I went with him a couple of times but it was too nerve racking. I remember sleepless nights in Tangier before crossing into Spain and being sick on the Channel Ferry. It's not worth it. Then I moved into my own flat and started dealing on my own. Jim still supplies me to this day.

'I never wanted to be respectable, I need excitement. My father gets a thrill from antique dealing. He picks up a Georgian bachelor chest somewhere and banks on it selling for a big profit. It's a gamble, he admits that. Well drug dealing's a gamble. It sharpens your wits. There are risks of course. I've been arrested. Somebody told on me and i was picked up and held for four days. But I was lucky. I'd got rid of most of what I had and they only got a small amount. But that's when you're really up against it, on your own. You can't crack, even when they're threatening you with ten years and standing over you thumping the table and ramming their fists into the palms of their hands. After that I think I could survive anything. All I got was a fine for possession.'

Obviously Bernadette has found a way of earning a living which gives her a certain amount of job satisfaction. Her customers, she maintains, aren't junkies who mug old age pensioners for the next fix but people who, while leading otherwise crime-free lives, have a liking for certain narcotic substances. 'I'm not saying I know about this first hand, but those stories about the toilets in the Stock Exchange being nicknamed the Powder Room don't surprise me. I don't push drugs on to people. They come after me because they're having a dinner party and want their guests to have a good time.'

If there is anyone who perfectly illustrates the term street wise, it is Bernadette. At 26 she looks ten years older and she acts as if she has the whole world tapped. 'I've done well, I can't deny that There aren't many women in my line of work. It's perfect cover though. People don't suspect me. I can't say I'll settle down one day because I've settled down already. But who knows, life might get too hot and I'll give it all up and take over my father's business, I've had the perfect training for it. I could be arrested tomorrow or robbed, but that's life isn't it. I might even have a child one day who knows. I must go now though, I've got four samples to test, and I've run out of household ammonia.'