The Gaurdian and Observer
search for household ammonia


The Observer Jan5 1930, pg 21
Harrods Six-Day Sale Advert
Bargains in toilet needs
Household ammonia
For Bath Cleaning an Toilet purposes 
Harrods Sale

Also Liquid  Paraffin (hotwaterbottles, soap, toilet paper) 
Household soafp - Harrods Easy Washer, Harrods Washing Wafers, Finest Primrose. 

The Manchester Gaurdian, May 2, 1930 pg8
With Economy in Elbow-Grease
some simple cleansers
describes how to use ammonia to make cut glass sparkle, cleaing silver
Other chemicals are 
* methylated spirits for cleaning mirrors, and other glass not used for food and drink,
* spirits of camphor for stains on polished furniture, 
* turpentine on knife handles that have turned yellow, (bone?)
* kerosene for cleaning clocks

This all sounds very upper middle class to me. 


Mcr Gaurdian,  Feb 14 1931 pg 8
Feeding the Garden
Interplay between sulphate of ammonia and lime, ammonia destroying lime which then has to be replenished in the garden. Not sure that I’ve seen this discussed in other garden columns. 

Mcr Gaurdian 1933  B.R..
Benefits of wood ash (hedge clippings are free) vs muriate of potash (expensive, can do more damage than good if not carefully used), property of absorbing amommonia

Mcr Guardian Mar 13 1933  C.C
Good Looks
advice on how to have youthful looking hands, wearing gloves when doing household tasks is a must, instead of soda, add borax or ammonia to the washing up water the hands will not suffer

Mcr Gd Nov 8 1933 p 2
Travellers,  Agents &c. wanted
Mfrs of Drysalters’ Packs, Traveller with M/c connection, ammonia, turps, oils and c, state own car, age, experience

Mcr Gd Feb 12 1934 p6
Playing Cards and Peweter
Clean playing cards - tiny amount camphor rubbed on gently. Advise s this is a job for children on a wet day or a day in bed. 
To clean grease mark from black silk  - carbon tetrachloride applied with another piece of black silk
To clean pewter: Methylated spirits to dampen sandsoap - rub on, then using equal parts pumice flour and soda ash clean the pewter, rinse in water then give final  polish with whiting moisten with meths and a few drops of ammonia. Do once a fortnight, or even once a month. C. 

Mcr Gd Mar 8 1934 p6
A Rubber Sponge: ITs domestic uses
cleaning windows, simplified if meths or meths and paraffin are used before the final polish. The amount of spirit needed is so small that a sponge once soaked will suffice for all the glass in the house. Upholstery will be cleaned and brighted if a sponge has been moistened with a weak soln of ammonia and water is applied gently. S. G

Mcr Gd  Mar 26 1934
Cleaning Materials Some Economies
Soaps polishes and cleaning materials are apt to claim a disproportionat eshare of the hk alowance. 
Buy soap in bulk, cut into pieces, dry out. Not use it when just a soaopy lather is requiered, use soap flakes bought in pound packets , more economical. Soda is cheaper than sopa for washing up and removes grease as effectively. Toilet and hh soap ends placed ina jar, covered w water and put in warm oven to melt - soap jelly excllendt when lather required. 

Carpets - 1tsp ammonia to a quart of water. 
polish is erroneously applied to oxidised brass, silver and copper and chrome plated taps and fittings, removes layer of oxide, leaving bare suraves of metal which tarmishes redadily. Use damp clothfollowed by dry cloth, is all that is required. 
Bath - rag dipped in paraffin, scouring powdersr

dsh on enamles and porcelain and are expensive Confine use to kitchen sink. Mcr Gd
Aug 12 1935 p6
Silver
clean tarnished silver - make paste out of household ammoina and precipitated whitening. To remove tea stains, hot soapy water to which a tiny piece ofsoad has been added. 

Mcr Gd Feb 26 1936
Spring Cleaning Walls
stale bread is cheapest. 
Benzene good grease remover (blotting paper and iron is suggested first  definietly in context of walls) Obstinate marks - fullers earth made into paste with household ammonia, unless the wallpaper is coloured or patterned. Varnished wallpaper should be wiped with tepid water into which ammonia has been added. 

Sale of Household Ammonia
Necessity of registartion
5 cases, first of their kind in Mcr under Pharmacy and Poisons Act  of 1933. 

Ordinary trader must be registered with local authority to sell household ammonia dn disinfectants, unless they contain less than 5 % ammonia. As a rule the household ammonia usually contained 2/3 pure ammonia. Bottles also had to have name and address of retailer on them. Hardware dealers 

Mcr Gdn. Nov 27 1936, p8
Kitchen Tools
care of. 
wash brushes in ammonia to remove grease. 
Stiffen brush bristles by soaking in strong soln of alum and water, 2 handfuls alum to pint of boiling water
Soak new teacloths in hot water continaing a little soda and vindgar. 
Teacloths washed daily in hot soda water, then hot saopy water
Teacloths keep good colour - peroxide in rinsing water occasionly, leae to saok. 
Washleathers - warm soapy water plus a little borax and a few drops of ammonia. 
Mops - hot water soap and soem borax

Mcr Gdn Jun 8 1936, p6
Washing an Eiderdown
in a bath of hot water, 3 teaspoons of household ammonia plus salt if brightly coloured. 

Mcr Gdc Mar 28 1936 p10
Grease Stains
Solvents
Petrol should not be used indiscriminately on delicate fabrics
Try wetting a lump of magnesia and rubbing it on the mark, then let it dry and rub off the powder. 
Grease from carpets, rugs and woollen, try irona dn blotting paper
ammonia and water used for woollens
In these days of cars petrol is always handy, but care should be taken in useing it first because it is highly inflammalbe and secondly because it is apt to leave a mark round the edge o fthe stain. Work from the outside edge, inwards
Best grease solvent is also non inflammable is carbon tetrachloride whic can be bought from the chemist It is not so cheap as some other remedies, but is effieicnet. 

Mcr gdn Mar 6, 1936 p 8
Fullers Earth
Hh uses
should be used instead of petrol for treating greasy stains on carpets or clothing. 
Grease marks on silk  - make paste of fullers earth and water to which a little ammonia has been added. 

No Title Feb 4 1936, p6
wipe mangle rollers with household ammonia to restore whiteness, each time after using the mangle. 

Illustration of woman wearing black dress, with apron, rolloed up sleeves, almost as if dressed as servant rather than housewife. 

Nov 23 1935 p10
Restoring the soil,
Many readers have written saying they find farmyard manure difficult to find...
scientifically prepared substitutes for farmyard manure should be used in combination with chemical and other fertilisers. 
* nitrate of soda
* basic slag
* sulphate of ammonia
* kainit
* superphosphate of lime

kainit contains potash but sulphate of potash is cheaper and in some ways superior. 
Basic slag is an economical phosphatic fertiliser for soil which lacks lime and superphosphate of lime is used on soils containing lime. Never mix supersphospahate of lime with nitrate of soda and never mix basic slag with sulphate of ammonia. 

This feels really complex information, it dint list sulphate of potash as a choice, then saysits better. Plus it does not say how to test for deficiencies, or to see if the soil has lime. 

Mcr Gdn Jan 3 1939 p8
Ammonia
Household Uses
There are so many patent cleansers, disinfectants and deodorants on the market that the uses of ammonia for all these purposes are sometimes over loked. It is advisable always to keep a bottle of it in the house to supplement these other aids or to replace them if sotck runs out. 
Lists many things, but never with precise measurements - eg. a little , a few drops, so the water feels silky.
An important point in dealing with ammonia is its storage. It should be set out of reach of inquisitive young fingers. In use it shoudlbe kept well away from the eyes. 

Jan 11 1939 p 6
Mops =
buy smallest size, renew frequently. rinse in hot water to which ammonia or soda has been added each time after use. 
cotton mops for the floor washed weekly in soapy water _ soda and disinfectant. 

Feb 28 1939 p 8
Care of Brooms
vacuum cleaners have largely superseded brushes and brooms, keepbrooms hygenic plunge into warm soapy water to which a little ammonia has been added. Hang up when not in use. 

Display Ad 11 - p13, Jan 1 1939
How much do you know about housekeeping?
Even the most expert hw are always on the look out for new ideas....
Promotes gas boilers for hot water by referring to tasks using hot or boiling water, e.g. cleaning sponges with ammonia (showing glass bottle stoppered with a cork) and cleaning brushes with soda dissolved in hot water. 

Oct 4 1949 p4
Saving Soap
scrape grease off plates and dishes before washing, use v hot water, add small piece of soda. For glassware add a few drops of ammonia to the water instaed of salt. Buy soap in advance, leave it to dry out. Hankies in peroxide or other bleach bought from the chemist. 

Mcr Gd Classified Ad 18 - Nov 19 1943 p1
Travellers, agents &c
Representative wanted on a commission basis for the sale of polishes , disinfectants, bleach, ammonia and other household  goods to wholesale ironmongery, hardwares, groceries &c. trades and general stores in  Lancashire excluding Liverpool area. 

Mcr Gc Classified Ad 27 - Apr 29 1944
p2
Wholesale Distributors require agents 1) lancashire excluding liverpool aread, 9 Cheshire and NWales for sale of Bleach, ammonia pre war polishes and c to wholesale hardware ironmongery and allied trades. 

[What would pre-war polishes be? Why are they singled out?]

Oct 17 1944
Reps required for Household Bleacher and Ammonia: South Lanashire, Cheshire, North Wales must have first class connections wholesale groces co-opshardware stores, commission basis Frost Smith Advg Finsury PAvement London
and
Reps wated for Mcr and NWAles Districts for Household goods haberdashery and Stationary, good prospects. good connections with first class sotres. Collins Advertising Mortimer St London. 

June 13 1940  p3
Care of Clothes
war time economy
set aside couple of hours each week for looking over and rennovating clothes. 
No longer raid the petrol tin for removing grease stains
Ammonia
Borax, starch or magnesia made into a stiff paste
Glycerine if available, a little goes a long way. 
Meths for straw hats
Borax for silk underwear
Put away clothes perfectly clean - hang out furs from time to time in the summer

Mcr Gd Classified Ad 14 Sep 26 1946 also  Sep27 1946, Oct 1 1946, Oct 4, Oct 7, Oct  8, Apr 10 1947, July 7 1947 , jun 19, Feb 10 1948, Jul 5, Dec 7, Feb 17 1949
p1
Save Soap with Solo Ammonia WAshing Powder, universal cleaning agent for washing and all household purposes. Coupon free from grocers stores everywehre. 
(in same column as Britain Can Make It exhibition advert - 14 Sept only)

Nov 1 1946 Classified Ad 34 , p2
Outside Assistant Sales Mgr req with good connection with wholesales grocery and allied trade, hardware and general stoes in Mcr Livp and districts, Cheshire and N Wales for sale of packed Barley Flakes, Semolina, Essences, Baking powder, Bleach, Ammonia, gname [?] and household lines. Give full partcialares experience, ages and salary rquesired

Dec 14 1946 Classified Ad p10 
Auction Rooms 65 Mosely St, Wednesday Next H Thompson & Son instructed to sell stock in trade of a wholesale chemical company including... Ammonia, gum, foot cubes bath cubes, hair rinses, Thawpit, insect powders, health salts


Classified Ad 186
Auctioneer Robert M Oldfield receieved instructions to sell by auction Thursday next the large and varied stock of Excellent Grocieries (voluntary liquiddations, Coupe and HilkirkLtd High class Grocers and Provision Mercants, 58 George St Altrincham)
PAtent medcines, vinegar, polish, ...large quantities of household ammonia, starch, 

Classified Ad 71 Aug 24 1940
Robert M Oldfield doing another high class grocery auction 
Starch, disinfectant, ammonia, glace cherries, cereals, Keepeg, Soda water and other stock. 

Jun 19 1947  p2
Octim cleaner - the cleaner with a hundred household uses. [Sales by Private contract, Misc]

Feb 17 1949 
Weed Killer Wavic dist by RK Baker 21 Cairo St Warrington [Sales by Private contract, Misc]

Sep 27 1949
Auction by Ministry of Works of surplus, plust stock from shop that has been bought, inc bottles of ammonia, bleach, scouring powder. Skating Rink chorley

Jan 7 1950
Window Gardens p5
Clean earthenware plant pots with 2oz household ammonia and 2 drams copper carbonate per gallon

Aug 15 1954
Ruth Drew Calamities in the home
stains- 
treat grease with carbon tetrachloride or one of the proprietary grease solvents. (Carbon tetrachloride in a 1/2 pint bottle costs about 2s fom the chemist). Work inwards, do this by an open window. 

Sep 5 1954, p5 Ruth Drew

Calamities in the home
moths - curshed paradichlorbenzene crustals scattered inside th parcels [of freshly washed woollens] are I’ve alsways found an effective moth deterrent. (These crystals cost about 3s a lb from the chemist. But I hear enthusiastic reports of a new mothproofing spray and of a shampoo which makes woollens repugnant to even the greediest moth grub. [unnamed]

bleach white woollens - half a pint hydrogen peroxide to half a gallon of water plus 1tsp household ammonia

The Washing-Machine
Roberts, Eirlys
The Observer (1901- 2003); Dec 1, 1957;
Consumer Guidance article about deciding to get a washing machine
section on Servicing at the end mentions that most machines will safely take synthetic detergents, but if tyou do use a soap powder pit in first a softener such as borax, ammonia or “Calgon”. It is as important to put this in as to leave bleach out. 
	This is the first use of a brand name product that I’ve seen today. 
	
	Company affairs: Final dividends
The Guardian (1959-2003); Nov 2, 1961; pg 15 
Jeyes Sanitary Compounds has bought the goodwill and trademarks through out the word of Scrubb’s cloudy ammonia and the other household chemical products of Scrubb and co. Jeyes will take over the mfcr and sale. 


The Observer Home Information Service
The Observer (1901- 2003); Jan 10, 1965; 
pg. 28

remove ballpoint ink - have tried meths, recommends Blik Office Equipment Co “Removeink” ballpoint pen in stain remover from branches of WH Smith. 
removing dirt and green deposit from bronze statuette - use powdered pumice and strong soln of washing soda, or if v stubborn, a strong soln of ammonia in water instead of soda. 

READERS' NEW LINES
Redhead, Jean
The Guardian (1959-2003); Jan 24, 1966; 
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Guardian (1821-2003) and The Observer (1791-2003)
pg. 8

Chemico - paste abrasive with many other household uses, but still need wire wool and elbow grease
Kleenoff - most drastic, but not v pleasant to use, strong smelling jelly. Must protect hands, follow instructions implicityly. Try to persuade our husband that this sis ajob withint the realm of industrial chemistry and get him to do it .
Household ammonia - place saucer of in the bottom of oven overnight and closes the door. Wash out oven in morning with warm soapy water, perhaps use a brush. Worked remarkably well. 
Easy-go - stocked in hardware shops, best thing tried yet, liked the attached wire handled brushed. 


NEW LINES
Fordham, Peta
The Guardian (1959-2003); Feb 8, 1965; 
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Guardian (1821-2003) and The Observer (1791-2003)
pg. 8
Good old “Gumption” used to raise many a curse from the hw as she broke another nail on its infernal lid. This is remedied at last: a container with  “Easy-Grip” lid. Price has risen but it is still good. My bet is still Mirro” diffcult to obtain in the London area, Gumption remains the second line of defence.

READERS' NEW LINES
Rodhead, Jean
The Guardian (1959-2003); Apr 12, 1965; 
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Guardian (1821-2003) and The Observer (1791-2003)
pg. 6

Lenz Window Cleaning Outfit recommended “not impregnated” does not say chemical free, or product free, just that it is used one cloth wet, the other dry, lasts a long time, so economy is implied. Some hardware stores stock them but makers supply a pack for 5s 6d inc postage. 

Readers' new lines
Redhead, Jean
The Guardian (1959-2003); Nov 22, 1965; 
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Guardian (1821-2003) and The Observer (1791-2003)
pg. 6
Cooker cleaning - a fortune to be made by the man who finally succeeds in producing the perfect oven cleaner - one poof and the insie of the oven is spotless. @ readers recommend STOVOID made by Burn Watson Limited, of Altrincham, Cheshire. IT is a paste cleaner which does remove grime and grease, puts a gloss on the chrome and enamel and is kind to hands. It does not remove burnt fruit juice. Cost 2s 3d a tube. Also trying CM2 just coming onto the market. Still did not remove burnt fruit juice but is very useful and it is kind on hands. Makers are Clemac Ltd, Astra Works, LondonAvailable from Gamages and a few of the other larger stores. 

READERS' NEW LINES
Smart, Elizabeth
The Guardian (1959-2003); Mar 28, 1966; 
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Guardian (1821-2003) and The Observer (1791-2003)
pg. 6
Drummer oven cleaner - easy to use in an aerosol spray pack. even softens burnt fruit juice. 

ABOUT THE HOUSE: Keeping clean
Pollock, Diana
The Guardian (1959-2003); Aug 12, 1974; 
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Guardian (1821-2003) and The Observer (1791-2003)
pg. 9
get dirt out but avoid scratches - Lever Bros Jif  - liquid cream made with ammonia great advance esp for stainless steel sink or hob units, instructions and warnings  should be taken seriously. 
Warrior Products stain removers
Boots laundry products


Gas danger exposes flaws in code for foam insulation of homes
Veitch, Andrew
The Guardian (1959-2003); Mar 15, 1982; 
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Guardian (1821-2003) and The Observer (1791-2003)
pg. 3
Cavity wall insulation off gassing formaldehyde, causing respiratory symptoms in some people. 
Household ammonia in a dish recommended to neutralise formaldehyde, though Building Research Establishment do not recommend, does not take away the problem.

CHECKOUT
Dunn, Elisabeth
The Guardian (1959-2003); Apr 24, 1972; 
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Guardian (1821-2003) and The Observer (1791-2003)
pg. 9
There now follows a commercial (an advertisment which it was asked should be displayed in playgroup premises at Lewes Sussex): “CALLING ALL MOTHERS OF YOUNG CHILDRESN. DID YOU KNOW THAT HOUSEHOLD CLEANERS CAN KILL?More than 600 children die each year as a result of coming into contact with ordinary modern cleaning aids. Safegaurd your home before it is too late. These accidents NO LONGER NEED HAPPEN. There is available to you now a complete new range of NON-TOXIC and NON-CAUSTIC cleaners. GOLDEN CHEMICAL PRODUCTS. Not only they are safe but versatile... The product range includes an OVEN CLEANER, STAIN REMOVER, WASHING UP FLUID, BUBBLE BATH, GENERAL PUPORSE CLEANER, WASHING POWEDER, HAIR SHAMPOO, FURNITURE POLISH, TOILET CLEANSER, CAR SHAMPOO, SHOE CLEANER AND CARPOET SHAMPOO.”
There now follows an announcement issues by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents: “These substances which can cause poisoning, have been eater or drunk by children: buble bath, carpet cleaner detergent, dry-cleaning fluids, shampoo, shoe polish, toilet cleanser, washing powder, wash-up liquid” Previous chemical reports have already shown that Golden’s claims to nontoxitiy and noncausticity are more than they might be. Goldne’s manageing director said he knew noting about his distributor’s advertisement and would take steps to have it withdrawn. 
