smog effect indoors

'The Heart and Home of Horror': The Great London Fogs of the Late Nineteenth Century
Author(s): Bill Luckin
Source: Social History, Vol. 28, No. 1 (Jan., 2003), pp. 31-48
Luckin (2003)
p36-37
Thomas Cubitt noted that working people were 'less willing to have expensive paper handing, and nice painting , and nice upholstery, because everything gets so black in London.' ref 35
p37
Marquess of Landsdown claimed that metropolitan smoke so affected the clothing of the working classes that it was computed that every mechanic paid at least five times the amount of the original cost of his shirt of th the numbers of washing rendered necessary' ref 37
Neil Arnott - suggested that smoke fogs added to the cost of washing the clothes of inhabitants of London by two millions and a half sterling a year

1850s washing bill - 5million

nothing said about drying - where

p41
working class londonders deprived of natural solar halt during the fog season, tainted air seeping into their houses and tenements had compelled them to keep their windows shut. As a consequence the close smell f food, and dress, and human exhalation, and above all the gaese which rush into the warmed home from very drain and dustheap up on the premises - led to outbreaks of fever or 'quite literally' to suffocation. ref 60

sanitation and ventilationist responses to the increasing severity of smoke fog in the 1840s and 50s, then later in the century social Darwinistic and degeneration sit interpretations Cost accounting approached (lost time from work, washing, alighting, deaths) 
importing miasmatic theory into protodegenerationsist scenario = deprivation by smoke got exacerbated by counter productive internal ventilatory arrangements what strangle those compelled to live in close and airless conditions. 

The Policy Response to the Smoking and Lung Cancer Connection in the 1950s and 1960s
Author(s): Virginia Berridge
Source: The Historical Journal, Vol. 49, No. 4 (Dec., 2006), pp. 1185-1209