British Journal of Photography Almanac 1954 P8 of 16p advert “Highlights of the Kodak catalogue” at front of the voume is for Kodak ChemicalsMade with inside KnowledgeWho should know better than the worlds foremost manufacturers of films, plates and papers, how to produce the finest processing chemicals.? Kodak chemicals, liquid and powder are rigorously tested for purity and fitness for purpose, and for use only need mixing or dissolving in water. Kodak Universal DeveloperExcellent liquid developer for films plates and papers. Contains wetting agent and anti-fog constituent. Highly concentrated. Other popular Kodak Developers……Other Kodak chemicals include Fixing Salts and Hardeners, Toners, Wetting Agent, Anti-Fog solution and Powder, White Ink, Opaques and a complete range of raw photographic chemicals. So here we are not told what any of the actual chemicals are, they are only described by their function. P22 Vanguard Photogrpahic SpecialitiesInc Boractholene – protects the hands against developer stains (using a chemical product on the hands, rather than protective gloves)P50 Campkins of Cambridge …. Suppliers of everything photographic – A to ZDark Room necessities (hardwares?)Glass MeasuresIlford HP3Johnson ChemicalsKodak SuppliesP53 elaborate graphic advert – placing the company Johnsons in a real place by giving true, recognisable map of the area, showing locality of head office and chemical works in relation to photo apparatus and assembly divisions, very local, stress British suppliers of chemicls apparatus an quipment. No products at all on this page, purely map. On p5 of 12p Johnsons ad are the chemicals for amateur use (preceded by professional use, which are all in quite large tins)Most of page dominated by bottles, small tins, tubes and packets of proprietry mixtures, not raw  chemicals. E.g. MQ developer, Azol, Developer 468, Capitol, unitol, universal dveloper, fine grain developer, print stop bath.At bottom of page, they stress their expertise and reliability, trustworthyness “Long acquaintance with the requirements of the amateur photographer enabes Johnsons of Hendon”, perhaps hint at the fact that maybe more men than women develop their own photos by refereeing “to produce every chemical preparation he is likely to require” usability information “ in economical, convenient and easily prepared packings”“A new addition to the popular range of concentrated vlopers (AZOL, BROMIDE, CHLORQUINOL, MERITOL-METOL, UNITOL AND UNIVERSAL) is CAPITOL a negative developer which has the poerty of increasing effective film speed by 200-500 per cent without excessive contrast. The COLOUR SCREEN OUTFIT contains everything required for experimenting with this simple and interesting additive process. P92 Ilford packed chemicalsID-2 the standard Ilford MQ developer for dish or tank devetInc ID-11 An MQ borax developer giving fine grain without loss of emulsion speedID-48 an extra fine grain developer [no explanation of ingredients here]Inc PFP – an excellend universal developer containing Phenidone (regd.) the remarkable new Ildofr developing agent which replaces metol.   [other Phenidone containing mixtures are listed] Further down the pageConcentrated X-Ray dveloper – a liquid developer containing Phenidone, the new non-toxic Ilford developing agent…So here we are given information about the chemicals within the proprietry mixtures, including a reason for the development of a non toxic alternative to Metol.Review of Developer 468 (Johnsons of Hendon Ltd)New developer which is packed in the form of a powder is basically a metol-hydroquinone forumula which contains in adition to the usual consituents Johnsons developer improver 142 and wetting agent 326. The formula has been specially compounded to produce an intense blue-black tone…. The powders are dissolved to form a stock solution which is diluted 1 to 1 for contact papers and document papers and 1 to 3 for bromide and chlorobromide papers. ...  Complete time and teperature tables for negative deve are given in the instructions packed with the developer and….. The dev is available in a range of packings to suit all users; the smallest size which makes 20oz stock solution costs 2s 9d. The next larges…. The larges size makes 10gall of stock soln 72sSynthacolor negative processing kits – british Synthacol Ltd, Rowsley Workds Reddish near Stockport. …. The kit comprises four solutions which are suppliesd as powder chemicals packed in five tins, making one litre of solution each with the expet…. The 4 solns are the colour develoerp and intermediate bath a leach bath and a final fixing bath…. Comparative tests were makde on the thtree makes of colour negative available to determine the colour balanc and gradation given by tehe Synthacolor kit and official processing chems offere by the manufacture. Synthacolor gave extremely similar results….. Thus are a most useful product and provide the photographer with an alternative source of processing oslutions at a reasonable cost. All the ocmponents of the kit may be obtained separately, a useful point since I tis not advisable to use the colour dveloper and intermediate  stop bath more than once, whereas the bleach and fixer will handle a fair quantity of film before exhaustion. P172Liquid stop bath siwth indicator – KodakThe use of an acid stop bath involves some uncertainty in knowing when the bath should be discarded. The problem has been overcome by the Indicator feature of this new product for arresting development because the user can see when the solution should be renewed; the bath begins to turn mauve when it is nearing the point of exhaustion, and it therefore appears to darken when viewed in the safelight illumination. P186 Capitol Developer by Johnsons of HendonCapitl is an interesting new dveloper which behaves in a most unusual fashion. [details of graphing curves of development time and contrast, followed by graininess reports. Not clear who this is aimed at, professionals or amateur, but small bottles of this were advertised at the start of the almanac for amatuers] It is expressly stated by the makers that the working soluntion of Capitol should not be used more than once. This may seem expensive, but it should be noted that little is lost in development time by using the 1+7 diution which gives tree tankfuls to the 8oz bottle. …. Thus it will be seen that Capitol is no stunt, it does all that its makers claim it will do and there are apparently no snags or drawbacks. Large section on technical details – ie chemical descriptions, glossary which includes chemical terms, formulae/recipes for solutions. Intensifiers list mercuric chloride, potassium cyanide, mercuric iodide, uranium nitrate with potassium ferricyanide, copper uslphate with potassium bromide, lead nitrate with potassium ferricyanideSmall ad on p482ManotoneThe toner that gives all shades from engraving black to chalk red. 6/- per bottle of 20 grammes. From your Photographic Dealer. Manufactured only by Philadelphus Jeyes and co, Mkers of Martin’s dyes. May & Baker Dagenham Ilford 3060  (phone) M&B brand photographic productsWe also mfc … special purpose develoers and other spcieality products as well as a wide range of photographic chemicals including ‘planetol’ p-methylaminophenol sulphate hydroquinone potassium bromidePicutures of bottles, e.g. Cobrol – Usability – speed, stores well, long working life. Concentrate available in range of bottles, also for commercial users large tims of cobrol in powder form. P532 -  SytecChosen for the festival of britain projectors by the council of industrial design. P535 full page advert for British Synthacol You can now make your own colour prints on paper! From complementary colour negativesEssiential requirement for making Synthacolor prints – printing outfit, processing outfit, synthacolor darkroom safelight (dominated by photos of kits)P536 PAC photographc chemicals which is also at Rowsley works Reddish. The solution for all your photographic problems lies in the use of Chemicals prepared o give the best results under all conditions. P.A.C. Products are formulated to give high quality negatives and brilliant prints. Photos are not used, just line drawings. Range of products includesBluol, degrainol, super degrainol, Tankronol, Unol and Warmtone developer Desensit N & P, Glazine,  Hypo-crsytosl WettolsGevaert take out multipage advert, mostly for films, plates and papers. Chemicals are listed under Sundries – just says “photo-chemicals for all purposes” p555