The Book of Good housekeeping 
compiled by Good Housekeepig Institute
Gramol Publications Ltc 
London and Chesham

First published 1944
Reprinted 1945
Reprinted 1946
revised ed. 1947 

note in frontispiec “From Mr  Friend Christmas 1949”



Cleaning agents and equipment

accommodation required
seprate shelf in the sotre cupboar - away from food giving sufficient space fo the household soap to be loosely staked to allow it to dry
soaps: 
hard soap
toilet soap
dry soaf
soft soap
soap flakes
cleaning paste 
cleaning powder
soda sttel wol 
paraffin
turpentine
borx
methylatd psirt
linseed oil
floor polish 
furn polish
furn cream
silver polish
brass polish  -

washing up - scouring powder, soap flakes - a small ledge is convenient for scouring powder soap flakes etc



p172
gravel path... should be made by someone who throughyly understands gravel. There is bad gravel as well as good, Some of it will not bind properly and there is another sort that makes the perfect breeding ground for weeds. In any case a gravel  path should have an annual dressing of weedkiller each May. Not only are weeds killed but an arsenical preparation freshens up the appearance of thepath in a miraculous way. 

p179
miscellaneous items[gardener’s tools]
Some sort of syringe is an absolute necessity. The best type has a pipe connection that can be dropped into a bucket of water or insecticide. 

calendar of principal work in the garden
Jan - spray apples pears and plums w winter wah
feb
dress soil w lime where nec, spray outdoor peaches w Bordeaux mixture
march - strawbs dressing of feriliser
april - dress established (asparagus?) beds w salt, spray blackcurrants w lime sulphyr
May - december  - no chem job!

no alterntives or rationale is given for these chemical jobs, nor any warnings about safety etc

p191-192 
From time to time we hear about substances like salt, sugar and asprins, or fluids like inegar, beign put in water to prologn freshness but reports are confusing and contradictory, and such practices are of doubtful help. However it has been proved that a little nitrate of chalk or lime placed in the water will stop tulips from toppling. This does not mean that they will llast longer. 

p221
cooking utensils
easy to clean - no crevices
reasonably light in weigh
the metal should hav no appreciable chemical eaction with foods
handles firmly fixed and insulated
sufficienly thick
avoid sharp angles
heavy machined base if used on flat electric hot plates

aluminium - Up to the beginning of the war aluminim utensils were the most popular types and possessed most of the reqs listed. Alm pans are inexpensive, clean and attractive i nappearanc eand light in weigh. 
A few people however, have dougts about the advisabilty of using aluminum for cooking. They may liek to know that the Ministry of Health conducte an extensive investigation some eyars ago and came tot hte conclusion that, while some few people may be allergic to foods cooked in aluminum pans, for the great majority aluminium is perfectly safe and indeed very suitable for cooking utensils. .....[choose heavy gauge, what kind of cooker]
p2222
cleaning aluminium - stiff brush. Metal cleansers end to scratch and wear the surface, with the result tha a fresh surface is constantly exposed and any slight chemical reaction there may be with food is increased. Even if the inside of an aluminimu pan is slightly discoloured in use - and this is quite commone becaus eof traces of ireon presen in the commercial metal - it is preferable on the whole to leave the sains. If you really want to restore the original colour of a pan, however, boil it up iwth wter and a little weak acid or acid fruit such as apple parings or the squeezed cut half of a lemon or orang. 
washing soda solutio has a chemical action on aluminum and therefore should not be sued unsless mixed with water-glass. mMost people liek to keep the outsides of their pans polished and fine steel wool is useful for this purpose. END

p223 copper is not very popualar except for alrge scale use, because of he work involved in cleaning. For sweet making however copper is particulalry suitable and for various reasons especially its good heat conductivity is generally preferred to other pes of pan. 

p223 glazed earthenware casseroles have become more and more attractive as regards both shape and colour. Make sure, before buying this tpe of ware, that the glaze is guarnteed free from soluble lead, for lead is a cumulative poison and traces may be dissolved out when cookign acd foods. 

p223
specialised cooking utensils
preseveing pan
fairly heavy guage aluminium is a good choice for the preserving pan, since this metal is little acted on by acids such as are present in fruits. Copper preserving pans were very popular in the past and provided such pans are kept scrupulously clean and free from all traces of discolouration, they are excllent for jam making. It is housever most unwise to use a ocpper pan for making pickles, since vinegar, which consists essentially of a weak solution o f acetic acid, reacts slowly with this metal and there is the possiblilty that traces of the poisonous salt, copper acetate, may form. 

p234 
weekly cleaning of lavatory
pour hot strong soda water into the pan (proportion 2 ox to 1 quart)  [defo publishd uk]
brush vigorously 
flush w clean water while continuing to brush the pan
pour in a little strong disinfectant and leave to stand
clean outsid eof pan
wash seat and leave to dry
clean window, wash paintwork where  nec
wah and polish the floor
polish lav seat
dust door wainscotting ledges et
attend to the lav brush and put away in an airy place or even hand outsid ethe window if practicall 

p235
there is very little scurbbing in the modern house, but the chopping board, pastry board and possibly the draining board, if not the kitchen table and the kitchen floor, demand an occasional scrub. The soap should be rubbed on the wet brush or the brush can be dipped in a suitable scourin powder or abrasive before use. 

washign w sopa and water alone rather than scrubbins is to be recommened whenever possible for the obvious reason tha tit saves wear and tear on the surface being cleaned but wehere diret is esistant the use of a suitable absraive is often helpful. use a fine an abrasive as will effectivly cleanse. 

cement floors - exact same wording as the other book of household hints
ditto fireplace and hydrochloric
ditto sink cleaning and whitening


p446
cooked lentils are very good for cats and they should be encouraged to eat them. 
p447
long haried cats, particuloarl in town, need frequent cleaning. There are some excellent dry-cleaning prepartaions on the market , made especially for cats. 

p441 Other safety first points
warn children not to eat strange berries
keep medicine botles and poisonous cleanign material out of reach of children. 
electicricy, gas, glass, tins, babies cots, air guns and firearms, small articles ingested by babies. 

p438
Home should be the safetst place of all - for children to play in, for housewives to work in, for tired workers coming home to peace and security after the rush and buslte of life outside. 
But what are the facts? On an average 8000 deaths occur every year as the result of accidents in and around the home and it is estimated that nearly a million persons are injured in this way. This means that *more people are killed and injured in the home than are killed by traffic or in the factories.*
What can we o to reduce ths appaling wastage of life and health? Frist we can see hat the house we live in as safe as it can possbily be. Secondly and from the housewifes poitn of view even more important, we can prevent accidets by forseeing danger, by not taking changces (have you ever been guilty of carrying lighted coals from one room to another) and by removing any possibly cuased of accidents esp when children or elderly people are about. 
Most of the minor accidens in he home and man of the major tragedies could be avoied. They can chiefly be attributed to carelessness, fatigue and faulty equipment. Some general rules sto follow when planning your home ar egiven on p 21. 

The houseiwfes part
o guid the hw in general rules for preventing acccidents the following code has been drawn up from info providedb y *The National Safety First Association* it is based on an analusis of the causes of home accidents, taking the commonest ones first
Prevent falls
repair, avoid highly oolished flors, not leave things [specifially cleaning materials] about, use step ladder, encourage tidiness in others, keep windowsn and stairs guarded when youn gh about, wip up spilled grease immediately

Prevent burns and fires
matches, cigs, naked lights, children, inflamable liquid - not to use petrol for cleaning purposes evn outside the house, fire guard At of Parliamnet, rubbish not accumulate, hot ashes, sweep chimenes, heat mat, hot fat, do not use inflammable celuloid, never buy celluloid toys for children. close windows/doors in fire, eletric and gas fixtures condition, switch off electric iron, bonfire, coals between fireplaces, not pour paraffin etc, dry clothes away from fire, extinguish matches, cigs, candles in holders, fill oil stoves away from a flame, stoves on non compobstuble srufaces. 
salt can be used to put out fire in a small area. 

p430
fumigating a sick room 
remove all hangings and furnishing from the room. seal up all cracks, fireplace, keyhole, windows and door then burn the sulphur coneswhich you can obtain from the chemist. The local publish health authorities will do this for you if you request it. 

p406
The new insectides
DDT is the new insecticide most familair to the public. It was developed during the war and may come to replace the older types of insectiide bt it has not yet been used over a suffienctly long period for everythgin to be known abu tit. Excellent though it appeara - and certainly very effienct - some people may be susceptible to it, and in a few instances, asthma, skin troubls and nervous trouble have been atrricubed to its use - wheher rightly or wrongly remaines to be seen. The FDA in WAshington however does not onsider it any more dangerous to humans han many other insecticides. 
Not a quick knock down poison unless mixed w other ingredients. Its action depends on its effect on the insects nerves. He gets the jitters so to speak and ides form 10 mins to 3 hours after contact w the chemcial. [this is almost the same wording as the houshold hints booklet]
DDT Quiz
Has DDT an Odour? Yes, a slight fruity odour but not a lasting one. It dissapeas withing a few hour. The carrier also may have an odour, thoug it too is quick passing.

 Is DDT mixed intwall paint and distemper effective?
 yes - less effective in oil paonts, prob ineffective in shellacs and varnis. Will only last a few months. Better to applie after paintin. 
 Should ou sprinkle your lawn with ddt insectiice?
 This is not advised at present, since th eresults of test to detmine the effect of the chem on the soil are not yet compelte. Sci say small amounts of 3-5 percent dust applied to backyards and lawns are apparently safe so far as soil is concerned. But while it may become a valuable aid in destroying insect pests out of doors, the Min o fAg points out that further experimental work is needed; used indiscriminately it may cause harm and kill good insets as well as bad, inc the bee, which is of gt impt in polln. 
 Can you dab DDT on yourself to keep off insects? 
 No DDT is not a repellent and this would be an incorrect use of it. Fruthermore DT can be absorbed throught the skin in oil solution? 
 Do sun and rain affect ddt’s action? 
 Yes, dDts active life is shotend by sady exposure to the elements. Outdoors it should be used every 2 −3 weeks instead of every 3-6 months as indoors. This is the reason for the recommenation to spray the underside of outdoor furniture. 
 
 Is DDT dangerous in your bedclothes? Probably not. But it should not be palced on sheets, pillowcases and blankets when in use becuase it is unnecessary.
 
 Will dDT kill mice and rats? It may but not as effectiv a rodent poison as others now on the market. Mice and rats have to eat a lot before they die. 
 
 Is DDT more expensive than other insecticies? 
 It should not be, when in good supply, for most incstces less of it is used per pint, quart or gallon than with most other insecticiese. 
 
p408   ants as before. proprietary ant destroyers may be used in place of parafin. 
p409   cockroaches boric acid _ pyrethrum powder or sodium flouride and pyrethrym. 
 crickets - usually indicates a cerain amount of uncleanliness. pyrethrum , must be frehs, sodum flouride may also be used byt with great care as it is v poisonous [has not said its poisonous before now] 
 eariwgs - paradichlorbenzene crystals. a poisonous bait may also be used consisting of Paris green obtainable at gardening shops mixed with either bran and syrup or brown sugar. 

p410 
flies as before, (formalin,)
spary with reliable insectiie. for a badly infested room use ieher 
1 pint water, 1 tsp chloroform, 1 tsp eucalyptus oil or paraffin
or   half a pound of pyrethrum powder, one gallon of paraffin. This pixture shaken up well at intervals of wo or three hours. Filer off the clear liqud and add 3 oz methyl salicylate per gallon. this spray is inflammable and shoud not be used in rooms with open fires or a naked light. 

lice - liquid inseticid or pyrethrum or derris powder. fumigation with sulphr is not always sucessful 

p411
Mites - 1 lb sulphur  per 1000 cubic feet of air, Carbolic an exellent tmt for floors and woodowrk in rooms affected by furnitre mites. wash floors etc iwth water containtin ght disinfectant [no details on how strong]. 

mosquotes and gants [ddt not mentioned]one drop of paraffin oil on he surface of water butts, srays such as those suggested for flies. 

p412 - paradichlorbenzene for moths, described here as fumigant (quite a long way into the text) 

p413 silverfish  soondie out if theifood supply which is almost exclusively fainaceous is removed. bakehouse pest, boric acid is effectiv. If sodum flouric is available a useful mixture can be made up of 5 parts flour, 1 part boric acid and 1 part sodium flouride. Plae piles of the poison bait on a piece o paper or card on the floor or on shleves or near ceives where the insets lurk. [ no mention of poisonous sodium flouride, or minding children or pets]

p368
use simplest methods first. most stains remoeve w hot or cold water. If the ark seems greasy use a grease solvent such as petrol or carbon tetrachloride. Rememer that petrol is v inflammable and that it is iundesirable to inhal carbon tetrachloride.

if solvents such as the above are not sucessful adn the article is hwit use bleaching methods. If the stain proves resistant, try potassium permanganate soln diluted with water, followed by hydrogen peroxide or oxalic acid [no mention or poison]

before attempting to remove marks - prelim tset. you will then see if the chem to be used is likely to injur eit. 

when using acids, alkalis or other chemical sdissolve din water, remember to rinse v thoroughly for if certain chems are allowed to remain in fabrics they will rot them. Be particulalry careful with bleaching powder and acid. remember strong caustic alkalies have a solvent action on wool and strong acids actually dissolve silk, so use even mild alkalis cautiously for woollen articles and if weak acides are used to remove stains form silk rinse v carefully.

repeat if nec. 

unknown stain, try simplest method of tmt firs, see chart. 

some chemicals requied for stain removal - oxalic acid and salts of lemon for example - are exremely poisonous, so store carefully out of reach of children. 
Wen using permanganate of potash to remove a stain use in proportion of a small 1/2 tsp to 1/2 pint of water. Apply this soln immediately over the mark, using a glass or smooth wooden rod. After a second or wo rinse or blot way wht son wit fresh water. the brown stain remaining can be removed by tmt with either hydrogen peroxide or oxalic acid. Use the former for silk wool and delicate fabrics diluting it three or four times with wate.r Wehn using oxalic acid dissolve a tsp of the crstl in 1/4 to 1/2 pint of water. rinse v thoroughly.

hydrogen peroxid should be diluted ,w hen bouth in the ordinary 2- volume strenght, with 4 or 5 times its own amound of water. 
oxalic aid should be diute  - 1part crystal with 5 or6 parts water
bleaching powder - on no account be used for woollen silk or coloured articles. Ic can be used safely for white cottons and linen privoded they are rinsed thoroghtly afterwards. Make up in proportion of 1oz to 1 gallon water. Strain thoroughly free from all solid particles and allow articles to soak for shor titme only. Rinse in several changes of water. 
 
 
 [take photocopy of this section I think]



