Daunton

p26
report on back to back housing Dr LW Darra Mair
closets or privies in groups (without back yard) making them either very far, or too close. Overcome in newer back to back houses - provicde water closet inside the house either in a bathroom or in an an apartment approached form the outside , in the basement. In modern badk to backs, provision of a garden or yard in front has been compulsory (avoiding drying laundry in the public street)

p253
inverse relation between death rate in each ward and the number of water closets
Manchester 1891-1898 7.3 % cases enteric ferver occurred in the 19.3 % houses w wc, compared with 69,8% cases of the 62.3% houses with pails and 22.9% of the 18.4% houses with privies. 
Both Birmingham an Manchester pails were converted to wc before  the WW1
bylaws insisted upon installation in new houses 
p255
wc dependent on waster supply and drainage system. 
liverpool - reasonable water supply, complete system of drainage, tidal river
Mcr - water supply inadequate, absence of large river, so strongly advocated ash pit. 
waste water, or  Fowler's closer, rain water from roof and waste water from sink collected in a tippler. no need for a cistern or special water supply, no large increase in volume of water to be handled. 
p256
tippler toileters only adopted on a large scale in Lancashire 
water closet development - 
pan water closet - hopelessly condemned, complicated, expensive and unhygienic. Pan at bottom of basin,  hinged so it deposited its contents into iron container. This container could not be cleaned, connected to drains by a trap which was never throughly washed out oafter use. dirty & odourous. 

trough water closet - controlled by scavenger. unlock access door, discharge the trough, flush it, sweep clean and leave charged with fresh water for next 24hrs use. 

p257 - trough closets were proof that 'a water closet system may be managed so as to be entirely applicable to the circumstances of the most ignorant and careless population. 

p258
hopper water closet - water only in from one side so basin usually dirty. 1870-80 improvements introduced, vertical rear wall, flushing ri so water covered the whole interior surface and water was retain in the bain. 
major concern was construction of trap between basin and drains, aim to prevent smells passing from drains into house, and ensure contents entirely demoed. 
washout closed had not overcommit the prolme. Water held in 2 sep bodies, in the bain and trap. When basin flushed content might be removed to trap and not drains. Combine basin and trop so water was held at only one point. Waste would fall immediately into the bottom o fthe trap which was visible and easily cleaned. Modification of the wash out closed resulted in a design similar to the impureoved hopper closet which had developed in working class property. 

general design of modern water closet emerged around 1890, cheap reliable and clean, though unusual before first world war to risk locating the closet inside the house rather than the yard. ]

p260 tenement blocks, water closets = medical experts had doubts. Task of managing shared space and facilities. Closets = nuisance. 

p261 "Littlejohn , report on the sanitary contain oon the city of edinburgh 1865
'in England where houses are self contained - any sewage emanations which may escape at once pass into the atmosphere and the air in the house is inot contaminated. In large shared tenements 'it is a matter of great difficulty to preserve anything like decent cleanliness, the air becomes tainted; what is intended as a public benefit is apt to become a nuisance to the surrounding neighbourhood. If they were place on each flat in our tall lands all the evils referred to would exist in a confined atmosphere and close to the sleeping apartments of our crowded poor'

report of the royal commission on the housing of the industrial popn in scotland  1917-18
'The poor require preliminary education in keeping their houses and stairs clean... it is only constant supervision that such can be taught the important lessons of cleanliness and the process is a slow one.' 

