Davidoff, Leonore
The rationalization of housework
in
Dependence and Exploitation in Work and MArriage

Until 1970 - no seious questions - only amusing and provocative piece by Pat Mainardi *The Politics of Housework* circulated within the women’s movement. 

looks at late 18th and 19th centurey England, servant keeping/ middle and upper class households.

Majority of recent economic nalyses of hw have been related to wc household -  Secombe 1974 and Harrison 1973

p127 
aristocratic code of honour - work itself implied a drop in status - wheteher in rade, manufacure or in he professions. The manual physical side of work was beneath conempt while, at the same time, manual skills, in sport, in swordsmanship and othe arts of war or in intricae embroider or museic making had high esteem. In middle class culture, on te other hand work activity was highly vlalued for itself, and i was only he actual p hysical or literally manual work which came to be particularly despised as ungeneteel. Followin on from this is is not accidnetal that hands, eir whitness, smootheness , smallness  thei encasing in gloves or conversely lareness, filthiness, roughness, redness, bareness should become a preoccupation of this period. ref 9.

rationalisation - recording of household expenditures, visitors, gifts, evenings out and in were recommended. A balance sheet of social and home life, as well as financial.  

changes in meals - p135
at least for family meals - a move to make food predictable. Increased rouseources were not used to allow choice to run riot. Rather the senitifment was that it is an xcellent plan to have certain things on certain days’ (1827) and ths laid the basis for the Victorian rigidity of join on Sunday, cold on Monday, hash on Tuesday etc whic dominate dEnglish cuisin for generations afterwards. 


p137 
housekeeping books of the nineteenth centur - suspect that they provide a legalistic model a ‘grammar of conduct ...  concerned mre with what ought not to be done rather than what should be done’ (Tambiah 1973: 15) rather than an account of what was actually going on in many household. 

p141
penalties fo rthe nineteenth century urban working class - necesit to buy in minute quantities every day screws of tea, ounces of sugar, dabs of jam, even if they could havebought in larger quantities, they had nowhere to stre provisions. What would be the most raional way to biy in various kinds of provisions, perishable an dnon perishable? 

Tension between aims of hospitality , generosity , lavish display or wilful waste on the one hand and the aims of economy, rational planning and careful forethought (or meanness). 

p144 within private househole, housework was done in accordance with teh wishes and bleifs of he superior. In the case of servants part of the definition of service was the legal requirement to work in the way hat the superior prescribed.   e.g. it must have been known by experience that soaking v dirty pans in water overnight made it both quicker and easier to clean them, but i was the rule hat every pan scoured, polished and put away before servants cold go to bed. 

p145
Lades Sanitary Assocn - shows how closely ideas of physical cleanliness  relatd to ideas about social and moral purity. 
domestic ecnomy  movemnt from 1870s attempt to deal with situatio produced by the primacy of social goals aong the middle class and lack of domestic expeirence of working girls employed in factories. Couched in terms of a return to the traditional skills, a girls birhtright which had somehow tbeen taken away from her by the overcivilising effects of modern life. Girls in neither class were necessaily by nature fitted to carry out domestic taska dn needed to be equipped to cope with new daeamands created by highter standards of living on every level of society. 

p148 
significant that JK Galbraith in his most recent book gives a central place to women and their role in what he coyly calls ‘the administarion of consumption’ i.e. housework (Galbraith 1973)

This still didn’t really give me the insight I was hoping for about who made the decisions about products bought - how much free reign did housekeepers/cooks have and would the lady of the house have known about the variety and efficicacy/value for money of products bought?


The Domestic Revolution
Theresa M. McBride

p28 

housewife’s role - requiered at least as much knowledge of domestic skills as would be necessary  if she had to performa ll chores herself. Mistress had to give orders and supervise work, teaching servant to do a respectable job. 

p29
Beeton’s desription of routine0 orders for the da should be given, any whestions answeres, any special articles needed handed to them from the store-closet”

recipes and instrucions for perfoming domestic tasks took up at least half the pages of most manuals.  



 

 