Good Housekeeping Household Hints

date?
1’/

colour photo cover looks late 60s/70s but the text looks maybe 1950s. check on libaray catalogue. 

methylated spirits
metal polish
oxalic acid (no info on conc or proportions to make up soln)
turpentine
furniture polish
strong ammonia
vinegar
good frurniture cream

chloride of lime
soda
“a preservative [wood] - linseed oil is the most satisfactoy preservation to use.”
grease solvent - unnamed
brush springs with oil or grease dissolved in a grease solvent such as cleaning benzine or carbon-tetrachloride”


p7 “if you use a carpet soap, choose a good make and use it exactly according to th einsructions supplied with it”
grease solvent can be used in place of soap. Apply with a cloth adn take care not to inhale the chemical. 

p8 “making plastic curtains.... a fairly thick thread such as Sylko or cotton” [what is Sylko?]

hydrochloric acid - for cleaning brick fireplace, gives dilution. “brushed carefully, do not let it ocme into coact iwth the cement bewtween the bricks which it would tend to dissolve.
rinse v thoroughly. Hydrochloric acid is v poisonous and must be used with great care.

2 paras down  -cement marks on tiles - treat w a soln of hydrochloric acid [same dilution as before - 1 to 5 or6 of wawter] Remember that this acid is poisonous and rinse thoroughly. 

bicarbonate of soda for bridge cleaning - cloth wrung out in soln of. 

p14  if necessary use a prepared paint and varnish remover. Creosote can be very saisfacorily used for staining floors. I has howver a v penetrating odour and it absolutely essential to aire the room thoroughly afterwards and if possibly put it out oof use for several days. 

p14 “when special sweeping compounds are not available, damp tea leaves, sprinkled over the floor before seekping, collect dust very effectually”  [which special sweeping compounds? this suggests that they were available and used in preference to tea leaves]

p14 Dusty cement floor
This can be treated with sodium silicate. Special preparations may be bought form builders merchants for the purpose and should be used according to the directions supplied with them, but when there is only a spall area to deal with, ordinary water glass can be dilued with 3 or 4 parts of water and painted or sprayed on to the floor. One or two applications should be made and the tmt will need renewal from time to time. 

p16 distempering walls - prep
for filling, use Alabastine or Keen’s cement. the holes to be filled must be well moistened and the Alabastine or Keen’s ceent pressed firml into them. 

p18 care of an electric cooker. 
to clean inner surfaces, switch off curent and wipe over with a cloth wrung out o fhot soda water. The use of caustic prepataions should be avoieded. 

p18 cgas cookers
once a week clean it by washing w hot soda water and if it needs stronger tmt use a soln of caustic soda, or one of the cleansing preparations containing caustic ingredients. These latter should be used v carefully and applied iwth an old mop; it is importnant not to immerse the hands in caustic soluntions. 

p19
flush all sinks and pipes regularly with very hot strong soda water, at least twice a week in hot weather. Occasionally after washing up dissolve two tablespoonfuls of soda in boilign water and pour over the sink and down the watepipe. an efficienct disinfectant should also be used occasionally. 

If your sink should become blocked up. make a soln of caustic soda one tablespoonful to half a bucket of hot water. Occasionally lay a lmp of soda upon the filter of the sink pipe and let it dissolve to prevent teh cloggin of the pipe wit h grease. 

p19 whitening a glazed sink.
Wash the sink with ot soda water to remove all grease, rinse then put 2-3 tablespoonfuls of a soln of oxalic acid into p20
the sink, using 1-2 teasponfulls of the crystals to 1/2 pint water adn brushing it in with an old nail brush. ...
alternatively use a sln of chloirde of lime but paply with an old rag as i would rot the bristles of a bursh. 

p23 for a furred kettle - 1-2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar to each pint of water in the kettle and allow it to stand for 3 to 4 hours *not overnight*

p24 Cleaning neglected brass
add half a teaspoonful of oxalic aci to half a cupful of water, and appy to the metal with an old cloth. let it remain in contact with the metal only for a moment, then rinse thoroughly and finally wash in sopay water to remove any last traces of thhe acid. ...Oxalic aci is highly poisonous and should be handled iwth great care. 

p25 Brass preserving pans
cooking utensils made of brass must be kept scrupulously clena and well polished. If they are quite free from any discolouration they are suitable for jam making; but the should not be used for preparing pickles, chutneys or any foods containing vinegar. Vinegar, which is actually a weak soln of acetic acid may react with the copper in the brass to form traces of a poisonous salt verdigris or copper acetate.

p37 
stain removal - presented as text list, alphabetical
oxalic acid (remember this is poisonous and must be rinsed away carefully. 
treat with borax  [nothing about how much or how long]
soak in boarx
iodine - apply a solution of ‘hypo’

Household pest p38
DDT preparations are invaluable.... DDT should be used carefully as some people are susceptible to it. Never spray a room occupied by people or domestic pets .Do not spary a room with an open fire and open windows to air room thoroughly afterwards. Wash of any liquid if it should be spilt onto the skina nd test delicate fabrices. 

“Gammexane” is anoher product which can be used in the form of a liquid spray. It is claimed not to injure fabrices or furnishings and can be used for the control of clothes mothes.... When using it in larders or panties houwever, be sure to cover or remove any food before spraying. 

Ants
calcuim phosphate - 40%
icing sugar 20%
sodium fluoride 40%

dry rot p39
soak in with either creosote, zinc chloride or corrosive sublimate solution (these last chemicals are highly poisonous and must be used with great care). 

lies - Probable breeding places should be sprayed with a good powder insectiide or with the following mixture
carbolic 5 parts
citronella oil 1 part
paraffin oil 14 parts

one or two saucers of milk and water to which a little formalin (one part in ten) has been added can be placed on a high shelf out of reach of children. 

p40 moth
a reliable carbolic disinfectant. ...

p41
woodworm
paraffin dropped down each hole - made more effective if crystals of paradichlorbenene are dissolved in it before useing, powder the crystals first and allow as much a possible to dissolve. 

p42 cleaning and bleaching ivory 
rub iwth methyated spirt, then bleach by washing in warm soapy water and soaing in hdrogen peroxide solution for 2-3 hours. Place in the sun to dry, repeat as necessary. 



here we seem to have very inconsistent information about chemicals - as this is a reference book that could be dipped into when necessary, it can’t be assumed that saying something is “poisonous” at some point in the book, that it will be “remembered” at anywhere else in the book. Other than the building supplies, there is nothgin about where to get chemicals or how to store them, no brand names to go off, just “reliable”. 