Good Housekeeping 
How to Remove Stains
1988

specifically says on frontcover
Where to buy specialised cleaners, Where to buy what the professionals use

intor
p7 
the expertise in the book is distilled from years of practical work by the GHI. Stains have been removed in the course of preparing articles for GH mag as a result of letters from desperate readers and in a spirit of enquiry as new stain removal products come onto the market. 
this book doesn’t pull punches... unlike manu books of its type GHHow to remove stains names products with bradned expampes. So you, the user, don’t have to work out what a proprietary grease solvent is. You can go into a shop and ask for it by nae. The first edition of this book was reprinted seven times. This new reviesed edition takes account of new dvts in stain removal tech and latest products. Where the old methods are best, it tells you so. ...



p9
Whole page on warnings, generic and specific
ventilation, flames, buy small quantities, lock away or keep out of reach of children  or “elderly people whose sight is failing or who may beceome confused.” 

extra precautions for meths, spirits of salt, amyl acetate, turps, white spirit, non-oily nail varnish remover, cellulose thinners and ammonia. 

p15
reiterates warnings. “important to bear in mind that the majority of items in it are **poisonous**. kept out of reach/ locked. Be sure that all he items are labelled clearly.  Do not decant anything ino anohe container suh as a squash bottle. No need to indulge in bulk buying. little and often is a more sensible solution. 
toxic vapors. 

p16

Grease solvents - proprietary . “Check and follow instructions exactly. Good ones include Beaucaire, Thawpit, Dabitoff, Stain Devils and the Stain Slayer liquids, Goddards Dry Clean, Boots Dry Cleaner Spray Stain Remover and K2R Stain Remover Spray.” Does not say what these are or how they work. , which I think is mostly carbon tetrachloride.  


hydrodgen peroxide is available from chemists, buy it in 20 vol strenght and use it diluted iwth 1 part to 6 parts cold wter. 

laundry or domestic borax - does not say where to get it, though assume that it would be found with laundry supplies due to the refrences to “laundry borax”

p17 - does not say where to get meths
specifies “white vinegar” or dilute acetic acid - take care not to get i on your skin. 


Generally does not seem to explain why anything works, or why not to use certaina things on cerain surfaces. 
e.g. “don’t use hydrogen peroxide on nylon” but does not say what happens if you do - does it melt, discolour, what?
no indication of what is in products eg Vanish stain stick.

blood p25
on mattresses small areas of fresh staining may respond to an application of thick, barely moistened paste of bicarbonate of soda and water. Press on and leave until dry. Brush clean. 

p41
fountain pen ink (washable on carpets)  - flush with a squirt form a soda syphon, hen blot, removes as much ink as poss by applying cold water, blotting frequently to absorb the ink. Apply a hot soapflake soln, leaving the pad in contact for 15 mins. repeat as nec. Any small stains remaining on light coloured carpets can be treated with a solun of sodium hydrosulphite (obtainable in powder form from certain chemists) using 25 ml sodium hydrosulphite to 600ml water. Do a test first as it has a bleaching action. 

p42
iodine - on carpets - carefully dab with a solution of photographic hypo (2.5ml to 250ml warm water). This is obtainable from chemists stocking photographic materials.