The Good Housewive’s Encyclopedia

ed. Pamela Fry
Spring Books 
London 
1963

p272
base dresssing fo fertiliser are also req (for making a good lawn)
1/2 oz sulphate of ammonia, 1oz bonemeal
1/4 oz sulphate of potash
1oz superphosphate of lime
apply each at the quantity stated per sq yard. Ideal dressing for lawns est form seed, where turf is used the sukphat eof ammonia should be left out.

p273 
Thanks to the rapid development of modern chemicals there are many first class perparations which are available form your seed shop. Simply scattered or watered onto the lawn. Many contain selective weedillers which attack the weeds but do not harm the grass. 

then goes on to give recipe for lawn sand

Lawn sand - effective control law weeds, 3 parts sulphate of ammonia, 1 part calcined sulphate of iron 20 parts dry sand apply at 4-6oz per sq yard three or four times a yr

p275
Pes...
Fortunately, horticultural scientists are keeping pace with these troubles and your local seed or sundries shop can ussually supply the appropriate tine or bottle to deal with the situation. ...

nicotine, malathion, derris, BHC sprays
capsid ubgs - dust w DDT or liquid solution. 
Earwigs, leaf miners, leatherjackets, cutworms, thrips, white fly, rose sawfly, millipeds and wireworms all zapped with (or other chem)
BHC or DDT

Thriam? 
colloidal sulphur 
colloidal copper

fruit pests - apple blossom weevil spray with ddt at bud burst stage early april
wooly aphis - meths applied with brush
bug bud mite on blackcurrants, pick off and burn affectd buds appl limesulphur whne leaves are the size of a halfpenny. the strength should be twice the usual winter strength
coddling moth - tar oil in Jan, apply DDT in mid june and mid july

pea maggot -ddt at flowering time and again 10days later
pea and bean weavil - regular ddt
flea beetle regular ddt

p298
Weeds how to get rid of weeds

thanks to modern weedkillers the gardeners ‘task’ is a comparatively simple one in the fight against weeds. to obtain the fullest benefit from weedkillers it is necessary to appreciate the three main types availab le and the way in which they work. These are total, selective and pre-emergent (often kown as residual). 

total - most powerful , most useful on vacant ground wheere weed groth partiuclarly heavy. Sodium chlorate so powerful that ground must not be usef or at least 6mo afterwards. 
two main types of selective weedkills - kill many plants other than grasses, and another which works theother way round. 

2, 45T, 24D and MCPA are used for selective work on lawns. Dalapon is the chemical which will kill grass but not other plants. 

Simazine suppressor - pre emergent. 

selective weedkiller, total weekillers and the use of your trusty hoe will soon put you in control!



Accidents and fire prevention 
p223
dry-cleaning - do not use petrol or benzine for dc inside the house. the vapour is dangerously inflammable.

repice for fireproofing - curtains etc esp in children’s nursery’s
coarse fabric:   8oz ammonium phosphate and 1b ammonim chloride to 3 qyarts water
Normal/fine fabric: 5oz borax and 4oz boracic acid in 2quarts water

p225
poisoning - always keep pills and other medicines out of the way of children in a locked medicine cupboard [no mention of household cleaners, or garden chems)

p228
burns from corrosive acids (acetic, carbolic, hydrochloric, sulphuric) neutralise the acid w weak alkaline soln eg bicarb of soda, or weaken acid by pouring warm water over burn. 
burns from corrosive alkali (ammonia, cement, lime, caustic soda) flood with warm water or neutralise with vinegar, or lemon juice and water

p229
disinfectants 0 cabolic acid, coal tar and chlorine in various chem combos are good disinfectants, also many proprietary disnf which are simple and effective to use

p237
poisoning - when to vomit/not vomit/ give tea or coffee vs soothing drinks
ammonia, arsenic asprin carbolic acid and lysol, carbon monoxide, chloral, luminal veronal and the other barbituates found in sleeping tablets, mercury, paraffin petrol phosphorus in rat poison, prussic acid, strychnine

p238
quicklime spashed into eye - wash out with warm water into which a little olive oil or castor oil has been dropped, bandage and visit doctor at once. 

p239
bee stings - alkali - weak ammonia, soda, sal volatile, soln bicarb soda
wasp stings - vinegar, lemon juice, meths, surgical sprit, a wet ‘blue bag’

dog bites - wash out and treat w Dettol or TCP
if any concern of rabies, keep low, allow to bleed and get to doctor, but if more than 30 mins cautorerise by applying carbolic or nitric acid on a match end. each tooth mark must be cuaterised separately. 

jelly fish - apply olive oils take a bottle to the beach
treat mosquito bites, gnat and fly bites with soda or household ammonia

p195
to clean alabaster - pumice powder and turpentine, wash off with water in which borax has been dissovled

alumninum - do not use soda to clean - eats away 

p196
bleaching - bleaching poweder chloride of lime, special commercial liquid bleaches are convenient follow instructions carefull to secure correct strength

p197
brocade - dry clenaing, if at home use benzine or tetrachloride

clean soft brooms in warm soapy water, tsp soda, hard booms same thing but add salt to cold rinsing water to stiffen bristles

p199
copper - severe tarnishing use hydrochloric acid diluted in 5 times as much water, then wash dry and polish
green verdigris which forms on neglected copper is poisonous, so keep cooking utensils clean

p204
lavatory
daily clean advisable, floor whould be washed twice weekly. once a week pour solution of soda in hot water 1oz in 1 pt into the pan, work around with a brush and flush. Pour in carbolic disinfectant and leave to stand in the pan for as long as poss. Keep disinfectant out of reach of sm children.
scouring agent which contain grit or sand damage the glaze. If there are stains use a soln of citric acid, 1 ist pinch [?] 1 glass warm water, if any of these fail use a chloride bleach, many of which are sold under brand names. 
p212
remove creosote stains with benzine or benxol
egg yolk carbon tetrachloride
fruit - soak in warm borax soln
grease  carbon tetrachloride or benzine, or propriatry brand which contains these. 
ice cream - carbon tetrahcloide
p213
indelible pencils - meths
ink - citric or oxalic acid
ball point pens - meths. indian ink citirc acid or permanganate of potash, 1/2 tsp to 1pint water, rinse then use hydrogen peroxide

iodine stains - sodium thiosulphate
iron mould
 oxalic acid or salt dampened with lemon juice
 mildeew = permanaganate of potash



complete Housewife
many of the same types of tips, 
salts of lemon is oxalic acid  (1tsp to 1/4pint water)
perhaps less dependance on tetrachlroide
explains that thiosulphate to remove iodine is photographers “hypo” (p181)
no brand names given generally, just chloride of lime, bleach, ammonia etc
no section on gardening (only indoor gardening, which includes notes to dust the leaves frequently) 

On poisoning - does not give any preventative actions, eg, storage etc
corrosive poisons here 
acids - acetic, hydrochloric (spirits of salts) nitric, oxalic (salts of lemon) sulphuric, tartaric, kettle cleaning fluid
alkali- ammonia, lime potash soda
disinfectants carboli, creosote, lysol
also gives signs/symptoms, rather than just poison. 

Medicine chest - in clinical themometer (this will be mercury)
magnesia powder
iodine tincture of 
sal volatile 
disinfectant

not mentioned are Epsom salts and Glauber salts which are employed in the poisoning remedies

p192
washing woolens that don’t go next to the skin
1/2 pt meths, 6 tsp oil of eucalyptus, a small packet of pure soap = shake together in a large screw capped jar
put a handful of the mixure into a basin of luke warm water and work up good lather. 

p186
wasps - inject powdered calcium cyanide into mouth of nest, or insert pieces of sodium cyanide and wet them with hydrochloric acid. Never used if a nest is inside or close to the outside walls of a building. Call in an expert to destroy nest if in doubth about using the chemicals. 
good DDT prep is recommended for moths eggs, beetles
ants 0 inject parafin to nest and set alight

for mice, trapping and a cat to deter is recommended, not poison. 

House cleaning - starts at floor - carpets rugs etc, look for signs of moth, remove traces, spray underneath with DDT or good proprietary spray. 

Does not say anything about where to obtain any of these chems, whether an inquisition will be faced etc. how best to store them, 
