1963
LaundryWork
Sir Isaac Pitman and Sons Ltd London  pp36

Modern Housewife SEries (cookery, laundry work, housecraft, mothercraft)
laundry work become part of the school curriculum
Secondary Schools
practical help to any who do their won laundry wrk an have not thd the advangtage of acu k at school
Kathleen E Fletchter - Teaching Diploma in Laundry Work, Battersea Polytechnic, Teacher of Laundry work under the Staffordshire Education Committee

Revised by Joan Dixon (to account for modern synthetic materials)
Teachers Dipoa in Domestic Subjects
Diplomat in Eduaction, Lecturere in home Management Battersea Training College

p2
builders - make garment slook whiter than they realy are, lather - a disadvanage as it does not help clean, difffuclt to rinse out, stop powder clumping in packet. 
choose suitable detergent, make sure dissolved before starting wash. 

p6
stain removal
tea, coffee, cocoa on cotton or linen - 1tsp soda in 1pint hot water. Dip stain in solution leave for 20mins. Try stronger solution [of what?]  step 4 is to make a solution of bleach (.e.g Parazone or Durazone) - interesting to see brand names, also, are these powder forms?

tea coffee cocoa on silk or wool - 1teap borax in 1pint warm water, if that doesn’t work, try 1part hydrogen peroxide to 7parts water

ironmould - 1tsp salts of lemon (poison) in 1pt hot water, dip stain, wash in sopay water
blood steep in cold salt water,  if necesarry treat with sals of lemon as ironmold. 
ink - steep in milk or vinegar, then try salts of lemon as above
grass and biro ink - drip in a little methylated spirits, wash in usual way. 

food stains from cottonand linene. twist material above stain, steep stain in 1tsp soda in 1pt hot water

paint - slip saucer under stain, cover stain with paraffin or turpentine. Stand for 20mins, wash with hot water and saop poweder or saopless det.
p8
some kinds of paint can be removed by nail varnish remover, will make a hole in some kinds of rayon, test first, not near a naked flame [acetone nor brand names not used]

oil stain - glycerine as for paint
tar stains - smear iwth lard leave overnight wash in usual way

to sfoten hard water - add a little soda about the size of a walknut to the bowl of water. [bowl is not given a size, hw is soda the size of a walnut, what an odd measurement]

immediately followed by how to prepare the boiler p9
assume boilers standard size - 1 tablespoonfull of soda tto soften water and remove grease, if v hard a little soda may be necessary. a stron detergen t will bleach clothes. 


