The Ideal Home through the 20th Century 
Deborah S Ryan 
Hazar Publishing London 1997 

p64-65  1930 first house to be designed by a woman The House the Jill Built was a competition run by the Daily Mail - open to marrie dwomen submit rough plans and specs for the house they would build for themselves, budes of approz £1500. Phillis Lee won, Douglas Tanner designed the house from the plans, hard to tell how closeley he followed the orginal scheme. Mrs Lee included features to ease the burned of the housewife = labour saving. Mateirals that could be easily cleaned, unpainteddoors had no mouldings, handles and latches were untarnishable. Tanner approved of thes features, agreeing that houseworkd was more pleasant in a well-designed home. but chairman of Royal Soc of Arts was not impressed - but was there anything in the home that removed the woman’s daily and hourly task of cooking and cleaning up after? If that home really represented what woman today wants, it can only be because she has not really though fo the possible. He believed, along iwth many Modernists and social reformers that the possible meant communal facilityes such as restaurants and laundries that took some of the labour outside the home, but such facilitues had been roudnly rejected in every survey ofwomen’s desires. 

p71 IHE took up modernism omre as a style than  a set of principles. It was though suitable as an effieiceny style, which promoted labour saving in the home by the use of white survase to show up dirt and germs easily, rounded edges to aide cleaning....

Heath Robinson ‘How to live in a flat’ 

p84 house of the future 1950: skyscraper flat   communal living would be a reality, common service and meals would be ordered from the restuarnat. 

p87 IHE was suspended 1940-1946 but Mrs Pleydell Bouverie was commissioned to survey the ‘house that women want’ published in 1944 ‘Daily Mail’s Book of Britain’s Post-war homes’’. Travelled around Britain, also used research from national women’s orgs and affiliates. 

p88 labour saving bathrooom 0 buildin bath and fitting that did not ned polishing. Adequate hot water supply and separate WC or additional one downstairs. 99% wanted a private garden. House should be near commnity facilities, built as a semi detached or part of an attractive group, not one of a long row. Only communial facilities they were keen to have were those that affected children, such as nurseires and play spaces. 

plans show wash house, utility room 
1947 all the old favourites were back: labour saving, food and cookers, gardnes, fashion, and leisure and recreation.

Sponsors - Seven SEas Cod Liver Oil, Nestle , British Iron and Steel Federation, The Evening News (garden) Tate and Lyde, Stork (inc taste test - approx less than 5% correct)

1950s exhibitions settled into regular fomate, summaraised as labour saving, village sof ideal hoes, leisure and recreations, health and beauty, food and cookers, gardneing, furnishing and music, furniture, decorationa nd sanitation, heating and lighting, handicrats, children. Exhibtors have included designers, shops, mfcrs and public utilities, speciuative builders and govt depts. 

1951 WI House - based on results of 1942 survey supplemented with new survey. was part of the Daily Mails contriubtion ot the festival of britatin. WI members were an important audience for the IHE. Should have been a door on the coal hole to prevent dust blowing into the laundry.   

1956 - breakfast bar. 

1952 - caravan stand included - popular as alternative homes and holiday acccomodation, and for servicemen being constantly posted to different areas.  Section gradually became less impt and promoted more as part of leisure and pleasure than own section. 

p121 can see chem products lined p on window sill. inc Tide Listerine Ajax?  ...glo  (still 50s)

nothing esp noteworthy in 1960s

1970s p146 1971 major redesign. No central display to set theme. Sow houses were set in landscaped gardens (looked more like a finished home) and remaned houses and gradens (not the viliage) The gardesn was abolished as a sep section. 1972 show houses had terraces rather than gardens. gardening sundries section was tiny, byt there were mini garden in the home improvements section - these were tiny town gardens or backyards designed by Jon Pertwee, Vivien Hislop and Alteha McNish. 

p151 Gardening made comeback 1974 - enjoying an unpreceded poluarity as a lieuser activity. Show gardens set around the show houses, but larer than previous two years. Also a garden advice section set in typical small engelish garden with talks and demos every hour by Garden News experets - inc Geoff Amos and Geoff Hamilton.

p154 − 1975 or 6? Roos from Waste - reused materials - gave publicity to env polution and benefits of recyling. 

p157 − 1980s new section “Women’s Interest’ show had always been aimed primarily at women, but now even more impt market as had own spending power. 1980 survey showed more than half of Britain’s women now went out to work, the highest proportion of any common market country. A dramic increase since 1951 when a survey shoed that only 1 in 5 women wnet out to work. Most had pt jobs in the service sector. Money Mail had high visibility, was popular, appeared Wednesdays in Daily Mail. 
Percy Throwers designed garden outside celeb designed house - used perennial plants rather than seasonal varieties. Although higher initial outlay, considerable savings in long run.  

1981 theme - energy in the eighties, looking at alternative energy following oil crisis of the 70s. 1989 Green Kitche, masterminded by friends of the EArth and green comms co Sustainability. energy effienct applieances, aerosol cleaners stain removers and air fresheners were free of CFCs adn the kitchen units were wood from sustainable sources (woman opening kitchen is waering ‘Save hte rainforest’ t0shirt

p160 can see bottle of fairy by sink on p 160  1983 Wimpey Super Single house. 

1983 huge unemployment (3.25million) pound at record low, govt raised tax alloundes and cut taxes by £2 000 million. All special features at the Exhibition were put on or sponsored by mfcrs or organisation. Special features beame less spectauclar as less money. 