Environmental and Social accounting

... the process of communicating the social and environmental effects of organisations economic actions to particular interest groups withint society and to society at large.  ... assumption that companies do have wider responsibilityes than simply to make money for their shareholders.  (Gray et al 1987)

all areas of accounting that may be affected by the business response to environmetal issues (Gray 1993)

Gray, R.H., Bebbington, J. and Walters, D. (1993), Accounting for the Environment, ACCA, London.  

HMSO (1977), The Future of Company Reports: A Consultative Document, HMSO, London.

Mishan, E.J. (1975), “The postwar literature on externalities: an interpretive essay”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 1-28.

Parket, I.R. and Eilbirt, H. (1975), “Social responsibility: the underlying factors”, Business Horizons, Vol. 18 No. 4, pp. 5-10.



Bowen 1953 - social responsibilities of busieness
Bowen, H.R. (1953), Social Responsibilities of the Businessman, Harper and Row, New York, NY.
Friedman 1962 - main purpose of business was to mazimise profit
Friedman, M. (1962), Capitalism and Freedom, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Shocker and Sethi 1974 - credited with bringing social contract argument

environmental accounting - not prescribe behaviour but influenced subsdies taxes and standards to influence env discharges (Siebert and Antal 1979)

see Gray et al 1987 for comment on local authority social audits = designed to apply pressure to radiacal changes in industyr and society. 

1971 − 1980 environment not top of th elist for accounting academics and plicy makers. Interested more in social accounign - disclosures relating to employees and product. Empirical studies in env issues were descriptive and unsophisticated. 

Agency theory? what is this? (ignores env/soc accounting)

Self interest of busienss - cost savings to be made by waste control/ reprocessing, or in creased revenue obtained through green marketing strategy directed at products, serices and processes. 

Donaldson 1082 , Ruchardson 1985 etd - accounting disclosures that would benefit non-traditional users groups.   PArker 1986 also
Hines 1988 - accountats make decisions which have far reaching consequences. 
correlation between greenes and a preferenc for regulation and prhibition, and a distruct of market based measure buecase it is argued that the unfettered market has caused many of the environmental problems in the first place.


social and environmental accounting is not accepted by mainstream accounting academic - 
		early models untestable, over ambitious in scope (all posible actual problem areas)
		methodology applied in early days was underdeveloped = unreliable
		information found in annual reports is not currently favoured by journals (does not test responses to hypotheseis on agency theory, not directly connected with cpaital markets) addition stakeholder gorups changes concept of what information is useful 
		empirical work currently undertaken not fit with scientific paradigm demanded by insttiutiona dn research journals
		work usually defined as normative/deductive or critical/ radical, neither of which is acceptable in mainstream
		
		However, compaies themselves are increasingly including information that would count as social accounting in annual reports, large companies issuing evnironmental reports despite lakc of interest by most professional accounting bodies. 