Notes from the periodical Practical Householder, accessed at British Library (offsite, have to order at least 2 days in advance)

Practical Householder – woodworking, tools, building only. Chemicals are not advertised. 1962 Modernising your kitchen P43 discusses use of Freon and Arcton refrigerants in fridges. P45 this spraying effect is similar to that obtained when insecticides are pumped from a gun; the pressure behind the liquid cases it to partly vaporise and break into a very fine mist. P51 Strong Odours in refrigerator – before calling repair man – defrost and wash out with warm solution of baking soda and water (two teaspoonfuls to a pint of water). It the smell is due to any foodstuffs this will remove it. Certain propriety brands of liquid cleaners can be used but they must be odourless. Abrasive powders must not be used. P52 Wash the inside of the [refrigerator] cabinet occasionally with two heaped teaspoonfuls of baking soda dissolved in a pint of warm water.  [no explanation why]Paint removal – only scraping and burning, no chemical methods. Washing grime/finger marks  - soap and water. 1963should the area be small or if it is desirable to confine the stripping to a small section, use one of the patent paint stripping solutions. If the area is large, burn off with a blow lamp or one of the electric paint strippers. April 1963 Making double glazing – Silica gel crystals inside drinking straw place in spacer. Or in the hollow metal spacer with holes or slits to allow desiccant to absorb moisture. .  Does not say where silica gel might be obtained. (October?) 1961P19 use a chemical stripper instead of heat, when on plaster. Or mild abrasive, good wash with detergent and hot soda water. sugar soap and white spiritP27 seepage of pigment – fault can occur if wood work has not been washed down thoroughly after using a chemical stripper. Old pain impregnated with stripper bleeds through as the chemical takes effect on the fresh paint. Wood preservatives creosote and tar products – burning off can be dangerous. Seal with aluminium primer. P31 removing mould spores – obtain an unnamed wash for this purpose from decorators’ shop. Or substitute by mixing 3oz zinc silicofluoride mixed into ½ gallon of water.   – no indication of where this might be boughtP60Rust killing liquids – note not chemicals – which do not remove the rust but convert it in to a phosphate which is hard and firm and suitable to support coat of paint. … rust remover is an acid.   Alt. rust-killing paints. 