4.3	Proposed plan of work, including its relationship to previous work, with key references.  Please avoid excessive use of technical terms, however if unavoidable provide a glossary of terms as indicated in section 4.5.  	(Please only use the space provided below – no more than 1,000 words and written for a non specialist audience.  References [avg 12] may be attached on a separate sheet):

		**Explain background to project with reference to key studies leading up to and introducing the proposed project. Should make clear why it is being doing in plain English. (Literature review)**

The use of chemicals in the home and their gradual displacement by branded products between 1930 and the 1980s is largely unexplored.  Chemical products are mentioned but not deeply explored in histories of technology. An exception would be in the work on domestic refrigeration; the displacement of gas refrigerators using ammonia (REF) and then replacing chloroflurocarbon refrigerants (REF) and propellants (REF), which is explicity about. 

However, the difference is that the user is not directly buying and interacting the chemical. Refrigerants are kept separate from the user (unless there is an accident) so the problem with CFCs is located in the manufacture and disposal of the product. A CFC aerosol user directly caused the release of damaging CFCs into the atmosphere, as a consequence of delivering the desired chemical mixture for their domestic use. Eventually, there was no choice as legislation meant that CFCs were phased out of domestic products, but consumers had become aware of a problem which had then shaped their consumption choices. 

I have selected scenarios in which people are deliberately choosing to bring chemicals into their homes and interact directly with them. The use scenarios also provide the opportunity to look at gender issues, although probably in a white middle class British situation as this section could afford these past times. 

Anticipated or actual consumer pressure would have in part helped to shape the types of chemicals available to potential users. Using up and having to replenish consumables means that consumers can afford to try out different products (which configures chemical ingredients and product ethos as well as promised and actual user experiences) rather than feeling locked into a high cost decision of a durable white good.  
		
Scholarship on the history of environmental issues is increasingly popular and this work sits well amongst them. The publication and popularity of Rachel Carson’s *Silent Spring* is held up now as a pivot point in the public’s attitude towards chemicals but as Mark Wilson has indicated that this might not have had a large an impact in the UK as people expect. There was already a lot of awareness of the negative effects of use of pesticides and herbicides, plus action was already being taken to understand and limit the effects which were strongly backed by government legislation.  Claas Kirchelle is curently researching the use of antibiotics in farming, which relates to Ruth Harrison’s *Animal Machines*which exposed intensive farming practices for the wider British public. 

  

I want to show the complexity of issues behind both the availability of chemicals and peoples decisions to use them by mapping out the interlinked factors of...
 
Looking at language that could be described as pro or anti chemical used on the product packaging and in other promotional material and in consumer reports (Which?). 
		
		**Describe what work is being proposed - brief clear methods including sample sizes statistics, analysis and validation.** 
		
		

		
		Clarify what is the MPhil and what is the PhD (novel contribution) 