
James C Williams
Understanding The Place of Humans in Nature

p15	Bigelow - technology understood to be the application of the sciences to the useful arts, or the practical application of knowledge, especially in industry or commerce. 
He saw technology as objects but also activity: invention, design, production, maintenance, craft
also technical knowhow and skills, rules of thumb, even unconcious sensorimotor awareness

p16Kranzberg and Purcell - technology is the area of interaction between ourselves, as individuals, and our environment whether material, spiritual natural or manmade

Bigelow probably comes closest with the rules of thumb  and maintenance, to almost mentioning domestic knowledge.

p20 Humankind has given technology agency. Also technology is controlle by people with an accumulation of knowledge and power. Understanding of technology is constructed as a cultural experience of people who have disliked something... the railroad cutting through their property, strench from spewing smokestacks and indiscriminate spraying of pesticides. Technology seems to have agency to those who do not have any way to exert power or control in its face - Ann Vileisis in email to author 2006

human beings have agency over technology
nature has agency over human beings and their sucess with technology

people develop technology in continual reciprocaladaptation with the natural and social environments in which its used   McEvoy, Working Environments an ecological approach to industrial h&s  S150, S153 technology and culture april 1995 


It helps us to view technology clearly as human artifacts, processes and systems, none of which act by themselves but rely on human agency

technology extends humanity in physical term by enlarging our capacity to overcome the restrictions of our world

p21  technology embedded in natural worldm in raw materials and in suggestions supplied to human inventors by the non humn environment. Donald Worster “Technology is a product of human culture as conditioned by the non human environment” It has no logic of its own and the politics that are in herent in every technology come from its human creators. 

Lynn White - a new device merely opens a door; it does not compel one to enter

Technology not only brings people close to nature but also distances them from it. Can mask nature from human perception, as well as sharpen people’s understanding of the world around them. 
