Consuming Traditions e.outka (2009) 

authenticity

Cadburys chocolate - adverts 1911
Cadburys... it is always pure in materials and pure in manufacture
Purity is inspeparable from every product made in Cadbury’s factory in a garden at Bournvillw. It is the result of the finest materials combined with cleanliness in manufacture.

Other ads show tranquil domestic scenes, explaining how beneficial cocoa is to the drinker. p42-43 “domestic interiors in this narrative set of ads implied a space that was neither rural or urban, and that united vaguely nostaligic and sentimental images with a modern but authentic product. ... benefits would circulate note only within the body but also within time, throughout the day, hingint that an entire environment was provided, which consumers were invited to reporduce and then perform within thei own homes. The cocoa like Bournvill woucl correct ubran dangers, stenrghen the body adn provide a place of protection.” 
		using the product confers these properties to the user.  
		
		
p49 - “Port Sunlight is a fairy vilalage rather than a Soap Works” “where an efficient staff of Chemists test each boiling to ensure that it shall be sweet adn clean as the Morning Dew.” Modern industry unitest with the pastoral to mfcr the purity of Sunlight Soap. (1903)

p51 - As transportation grew ever more efficient and individuals went father from accustomed suroundings, the power of familiar brands to remind travelers of home grew rapidly. Lever was an early master of such techniques, recognising in Port Sunlight how products might produce and imply not simply a bar of soap but an entire environment. 

p140 plate glass technology -= large expanses of glass in shop windows. Most store owners crammed as many goods as poss into the winow. 3D catalogue method, owners arranged vast quantities of ofjects, often i nelaborate towers = torturing the merchandise. Rarely carefully composed, emphasised qunatity rather than design. 1909 trend moved from catalogue type windows to elegrant displays that empahased fantiasty and one of a kind commodities.

		Ideal Home exhibitions - would these have included advice/ opportunities to try/ buy chemical products suitable for new materials in the home/ ensure success in the garden?
		