Ecofeminism
Cat Cox
Francoise D’Eaubonne 1974 was the first to use the term eco-feminism
sense of inter relatedness - healthy life depends on a healthy environment, humans exist in a symbiotic rship with Earth and that to disregard this is destructive to both.

various ecological feminist perspectsve represent a range of practicall activities. 

Women’s Environmetnal Network in UK - recognise the relationship between consumerism and the environment. 

femnist writers developed a new view of women and nature. 

francoise D’Eaubonne Les Femmes Avant le PAtriarchie 1975
Mary DAly’s Cyn/Ecology (1978)
Susan Griffin Women and NAture (1978)
p285
compared domination of nature with oppression of women. 
Griffin dualistic though created unnatural barriers and contrived speatartions, and place unequal values on each. 

                                      
Carolyn Merchant The Death of Nature (!980)
women and nature had been disparaged promoting science and reason over an organic view. 

using language of ecology to explore feminism, feminism has also contriubted ot the study of ecology by supplying political understandings of patriarchy. 

p286 women’s reprouctive capacity sensitises them to the environment - foetal damage or miscarriage as a result of contact with seemingly benign env pollutants

cites Silent Spring as a watershed, followed by th eestablishment of Earth Day and the US EPA in 1970

Nuclear Madness by Helen Caldicott 1978 similar view

Women for life on eArth - connected iwth women’s peace movement. 1981 in England to look at healing, military and ecology. UK group marched to Greenham under the WFLE banner. 
p289 Caldicott and Leland 1983 - Reclaim the Earth - women speak out for life on earth

Late 1980s est Womne’s Environmental Networkreerached and collated info on env inssues concerning women, esp on consumer issues. 

concious of limitations of science while recognising its value as a means of checking and accounting. Ues sci lang to convey and make info accessible but is critical of the way that science has been used to manipulate ideas and attitudes through complex and technical info. 

p291 
Sprititual, belif in Earth Mother, Earth seen as sacred nuturing. Feminists in the 70s self liberation was a consiousness raising experience, for some this entaile dthe signiicace of a spiritual experice. 
292 
Womens’ spirituality movement emerging independely of male modesl adn mail guidance. Turn to Wicca and oth er Earth based belives, honouring cycls of the earh and connecting with the body in ritual and celebration, valuaing and expressing the psyche and imagination , prtenak 1982 King 1989

1970s James Lovelock developed Gaiai theorgy, modelling earth as  a self regualting organism. Sparked dialogue between mainstream sci ecological community and 70s spiritual movemetn. 

Feminist rediscovery of the Goddess through Arch and hist examinaion fo prehistory priviede inspiration for many women. Veneration of earth becomes intrinsic to spirituality both in the ceelbration of nature and understandin huamn integration with Earth. 

Starhawk Draming the Dark 1980/