Some Hazards of Accidental Gassing
Lieut.-Colonel J. C. Crook
Med Sci Law, January 1966; vol. 6, 1: pp. 29-36.

p31
writing on the category of irritant gasses Crook says that 
tear gases ammonia and formaldehyde are all highly soluble and produce such intense irritate of the conjunctiva, nose and throat that rapid avoiding action is usually taken; hence accidental gassing is rare. Chlorine produces a similar effect but it is less soluble and in high concentration it is apt to affect the whole of the respiratory tract. It is in common household use as bleach and if a bleach and a bisulphate cleaner such as Harpic are mixed, a high concentration of chlorine can be rapidly evolved. In this way many case of chlorine poisoning are seen nowadays. 
[does not give any figures or refs for these]

p31
Frank Whitaker West of Ilkley Yorks was charged with the manslatughter of a youth of 17 by his criminal negligence in the keeping and handling of phosgene. Sci Correspondent of Yorkshire post said that the hearing resembled a chemical symposium more than a trial and that even the experts were treading on unfamiliar ground. trial highlighted the fact that there is no legal control over the sale of phogene and that anyone can buy this highly dangerous substance provided the suppler is satisfied by the bona fide credentials of the customer

p33
hydrogen sulphide - stink damp - them industry, natural gas and sewers
hydrogen cyanide - most cases result from use as fumigant in warehouse, dwellings and ships. asphyxia by arrest of internal cellular respiration - paralyses the tisssue oxidative enzymes. responsible for more human weather than any other as it was used by nazis in their extermination of jews as acute cyanide asphyxia is one of the most rapid modes of deaths. 1 or 2 breaths= fatal. 

p34
accidental poisoning still quite common. widely marketed because it is noninflammable and non explosive as a cheap dry cleaning fluid. 
general toxic effects and both the liver and the kidney may be damaged, kidney damage more freq
wide range of individual susceptibility and alcohol has profound synergic effect. 
Trine much less toxic, than ctc, a better anaesthetic and dry cleaning agent. Any toxic effect noted due to accidental or addictual exposure are dry primarily to its narcotic effect and fatalities are usually due to ventricular fibrillation. 

p35
incidence
accidental gassing in relation to poisoning by inhalation from the national poison info centre at guy's hospital, Roy Goulding.  33 inquiries altogether. 
household cases - most were from inhalation of chlorine liberated from mixing Harpic and a bleach. Agricultural arose form insecticides of one sort or another, industrial cases most were from chlorine and the plasciciser Teflon, not well documented at the present but gives rise to influenza like illness
form 2% of total no inquiries made at the centre, but in all probability only a small proportion of the total no passing incidents and fatalities in the uk in 1964.

