Is there a way I can check share prices for ICI following news of garden chem/ ag poisonings?
Suspect no change, unlike pharmaceuticals. 

Greene, Jeremy : Regulating Drugs, regulating diseases. 
stimulated by p121 ways of regulating
news of Orinase possible toxicity spelled disastrous things for the company - stock fallen in heavy trading. 

p122
Greene's article does highlight the users of the pharmaceuticals - shows letters from concerned patients, asking for their doctors to have access to more information so that they can advise on continuing or stopping taking a pharmaceutical once news has broke on possible adverse effects. 

Some patients learned of the news before their doctors, who found out in news reports. The controlled release of timely information was out of hand - in public domain there were discussions of risk and asymptomatic disease. 

p123
leak considered a scare tactic by some doctors, against ethics. disrupting the power/control balance between patient and doctor. Follow established pattern of notifying practiconers before public announcement. 

area that is historically overlooked - postmarket regulation of product in practice. 

------------
Many questions here about authority, being undermined, being in the pocket of drug houses. Garden and household chemicals do not have an authority/body that acts as an intermediary as doctors do when prescribing drugs. Physician as knowledge-broker (p129) There are however, experts in the form of RHS, celebrity gardeners etc who can act as a sort of authority in a less formalised sense. 
-------------

p127
May 1970 planned meeting to finalise communications but Washington Post leaked material 1 day before. 
pivotal moment
openness in communication when increasing amounts of media coverage were being devoted to the topic of consumer health. (Katz 1984) 
era of uncontested authority had ended
p128
reporting over the financial newswire significant
now common to see first publicity for clinical trials results in business sections, but this was not the case in 1970

p131
public writing letters comparing to viet nam war, getting to the moon, yet medical standards ranking lower than other countries. Generalised distrust between citizens and state.

p132
standardised letter response to patients from FDA turned responsibility back to doctors, with their knowledge of the individual

production and maintenance of controversy about the study a valid way to prevent consensus formation around the publicised study, maintain space that widespread usage of that type of pharmaceutical could be regarded as legitimate
Orchestrated by Upjohn company PR and leading specialist physicians. 

p134
Orinase had been doubly approved - before the passage of Keufar-Harris bill that needed proof of efficacy in addition to proof of safety. 
retrospective efficacy reivew

