International Congress on Cosmetics and Household Chemicals 
Abstracts

interesting sounding abstracts
p91 New up-to-date packaging materials, containers and systems in the cosmetics and household chemical industry
titusz Kerekes
Institute of materials handling and packaging, Budapest

In respect of the packaging requirements, the most impt group besides the pharmaceutical products, is that of the cosmetics and household chemical products. The packaging shall meet both the value preserving and value increasing functions. 
Packaging is an effective part of the market creating capability of the product. The introduction of the product shall be preceded in the respect of packing by a far reach gin market research work that differ fro many other products. 
The paper described the currently used packaging material, containers and systems in terms of packaging materials in the cosmetics and household chemical industry. In the basis of the foreign and Hungarian packing practice, as well as the plans of the background industry producing packaging materials the expected developments are outlined. 


Laszlo Koronczay, Budapest, ACSI
economic conditions of today motivate all enterprises - including those producing cosmetics, to cost reduction. Rational dimensioning can lead to considerable savings in packaging costs and in distribution expenses relate to them. From individual consumer packages though collective to globalised loading , computerised methods can bring substantial improvement in the who system. 
Dimensions of exiting palace, forms can be rationalised, reduction in types of boxes, better utilisation of available storage space
Cooperation with designer and with the computer the most rational dimensions can be fixed when diesinking new forms. 
algorithms for working out how many packages can be stored in a given space. Revise packaging activities, deuced packing materials, considerable savings. 

p33
The effect of fragrances on the human body 
walter Steiner
drom. Parfumole Internationa
what influence does the sense of smell have on man's emotions and behaviour 
adjective list method is suitable for measuring the amount and kinds of influence of each fragrance. Household products - room spray whose imperceptible presence in the room made the test persons sig more satisfied, less depressed, memory effiencty . 
activating or calming e.g. morning shampoo and activation scent. Skin resistance test measured - showed striking differences. 

V1

E. Stronink
Ethylcarboxlyic acids for cleaning applications
p30-35
29.09.87
surfactants with double function - 
in acid form nonionic surfactant and in the neutralised (alkaline form they behave like an anionic surfactant. 

don't have profiles in hard warted (fatty acid soaps in hardwarter form insoluble calcium soaps) 

ethiercarboxylic acids are- alkaline dn acid tolerant, electrolite tolerance pH tolerance
have tolerance to chlorine, 
can be low and high foaming
biodegradable
lime soap dispersability 
hydrotope effects


p33
ether carboxylic acid can give high viscosity under alkaline conditions. Impt for making oven cleaners,  - need to cling to vertical side of oven. 
gives recipe
Demin[eralised?] water 75%
Akypo MB 1690 5%
NaOH 50%   20%
p34 for the same reason toilet cleaners based on sodiumhypochlorite can be thickened by means of an ether carboxylic acid but it must have good chlorine copatiatbility. 
simple but effective toilet cleaner 
demin water   37.3%
NAOH 50%     2.3%
Akypo TFC-SN 60%   5%
sodium hypochlorite 150g/l   55.4%

volume 1
**The perfuming of consumer products; a matter of communication**
p188-195
RF van Croonenborgh Quest internationa, Naarden
In the beginning: perfume required to cover bad odour of the product
without a perfume the consumer could not or did not want to use the product 
this was considered by the consumer to be unperformed. 

later the perfume also to give product pleasant smell. Had to be a pleasure to use the product. 

Today the role of perfume is complex, has to be pleasant but also provide the message - support the claim you make, has to communicate the function. 

p189
need to know which product the fragrance will be used - formulate specifically for it. Substandard performance when it appears in different pro cut area. Is ita new producet, relaunch (and why)/ 

fragrance supplier needs to know about the customer

what  message does the product have to communicate - who are the competitors, what is the pack design, which colour, what is the advertising like. 
Where the product is marketed has a bearing on the tests done - e.g. has to be temperature stable. How does the client screen fragrance submissions? Who makes the decisions (is it the boss or his wife or secretary or are expert panels inovled)? 

p190 technical problems to be solved
need unperformed product base - incorporate base odour
packaging materials - harmful to perfume or visa versa

p192
fragrances evaluated in the product at key stages in product lifeccyle i.e. the main consumer assessments point
e.g. shampoo - from the bottle, from the hands, during washing, during drying and o n dry hair
large investment in evaluation facilities

p193
consumer testing - none can afford it for every briefing. Exposring consumer responses can provide an invaluable contribution to the project. Personally I have the opinion that using consumer testing as the decisive tool in the selection process will kill all innovation and creativity: the consumer has to be educated to new ideas and odours. Slow process - too creative new fragrances - shock effect, defensive reaction. Too much consumer testing will end in a novelisation of the appearance and odours of products in a particular segment. Good evaluator should have the courage to defend a new creative idea because too much compromise leads only to safe submissions which make good products but will never be trendsetting. 

too many development chemists and product formulators consider a fragrance as the last ingredient needed for an already finished formulation. I object. Perfume is already a v complex mixture, it can cause a series of severe problems in the product chosen or created. 
p194
interactions between the perfume raw materialise initiate by the product
interactions between components of perfume and product
interactions between perfume and packing

need stability tests
p195
A perfume is not just an additive. 


**The application of fragrances in cosmetic & household chemistry Safety and Selection criteria**
Dieter Braun
Managing officer
DRAGOCO Ges. mbH Vienna
196-206

perfumer's viewpoint
As you all know, one of the most important criteria to make a product a success is a pleasant fragrance. Suffieccntly strong and pleasant fragrance impression = impact. Even at small dosage, good fragrance will always have a pleasant smell. Cheap fragrance will smell the cheaper the higher the dosage. 

p197 
masking properties of fragrance may not be suffienct to cover sting odours - compromise. 
essential oils and natural extracts are restricted or forbidden in some applications. International Fragranc eAssociation IFRA - safeguard consumers interest. IFRA cooperate with Reseasrch Institute for Fragrance Materials RIFM
dispose of all data on raw materials that are being used in fragrance industry. Ssbtances for which no adequate in-use experience exists are subject to a test procedure
acute oral toxicity
test of skin irritation potential
test for skin sensitisation peotnetoal 
for materials where eye irritation may be significant - eye irrantcy study
for materials where photo toxicity may be sig, a test for phototox and photosensitisation potential . 
Fragrance compounds are under permanent control, fragrance formula may be corrected rom time to time - mfc has to be notified and agree to change. 
p198
IFRA guidelines - basic rules for personnel, hygiene, production premises, quality control, labelling ad packing. 

skin and mucous memrane tested perfume compounds are preferable used in pharamcutal industry. 

p200
sex and age of taget grow  = data limit the number of fragrance types acceptable to the cistomer
composition of product
pH = effect on stability
colour - perfume must not change colour of product. Product colour may decide on whether the perfume is acceptable to the target market - lemon fragrance in a blue packing instead of yellow will most certainly not be very appealing to the customer. 
packaging - transparency - destroyed by ultraviolet if in transparent packing
aerosol - fragrances react with propellant
price - keep under control
timing - takes time to do tests and evaluations, stability won't be able to be judged after 4 weeks. 

p202
laymen - grouped to age and social status, should be asked to test and evaluate a product. 
p203 
discussed mainly fragrances contain din cosmetic product. But applies also to household chemistry as well as cleaning and detergent chemistry "With a pleasant fragrance, a product sells more easily. " 
also chemical-technical industrial , drilling and cutting lubricants, seals, plastic articles for baby tolys, synthetic textiles, etc. All require masking and ask for perfume. 

p205
fruity esters are cheap and have good masking properties, but make you cough if working with hot vapour so no good for moron cleaners. perfuming easily volatile solubles hazardous to health must be seen from a rather critical viewpoint. does not make sense to mask their proper door since the customer might then inhale more tfo the poisonous gases htna with products who's disgusting smell causes feelings of aversion. Elements which we cannot smell but may hazard  our health. require so called warning odour. 


volume 2
Packaging of cosmetics and household chemicals and environment protection
Teszar Tibor
p396-402

One of packaging's basic functions is to protect the environment from the contamination of packed product. 
Packing material - env friendly or cause permanent harm. 

p397
steel corrodes, protecting against it is in the interest of the product and the env. 
decomposition of plastics
p398
combined materials - layered materials, co-extruded packing materials. Use less / minimum quantity and thus degrease easier. 
p399
reuse - difficult where requires collection and reprocessing but and also contamination of product residues. Look to light weight packaging. 
p400
ozone
child-proof
wide use abroad, however not in general use
dangerous materials should be kept out of reach or by proper education not to touch what is prohibited. Must do our best to divert this danger.  Minor difficulty of general use is the additional charges. Greater handicap is that our background industry is not prepared for the development and mcc of such closing structures. 
accurate dosing. 
	aperture reducing insert, to more intricate charging stubs, feeding valve types
	the thought that t a superfluously used shampoo or detergent means a bigger turnover and better business of rthe producer is not only unethical but also injurious to the environment. re. Eutrophication. 
	Proper labelling
	accurate instruction - proper use, but also protects env
	obligatory inscription which call attention of the popn to the harming effect of badly handled chems protects health. 