Who was the Gaurdian for?
From the articles I’ve seen, they seem to be for upper middle class (or aspirant) and above. The references to furs and silvers, the jumble sale article about being either a person giving away their clothes or an organiser, then a mention of the privelliged class who don’t have to work for this and are given the bounty.
The household cleaning tips are very much the same as the others I’ve seen, where they don’t tend to say where to get the chemical or to mention any brand names to ask for. As expected, there are more references to saving resources, making them go further when the war is in progress, but nothing about the lack of branded goods is mentioned in these columns of helpful hints.

This is where the Readers’ New Lines article is interesting. Introduced in the 1960s readers reccomend products which are also tested out by the writer of the article (Jean Redhead or Elizabeth Smart). This coincides with Eirlys Roberts starting a column for the Observer on consumer choices, eg. washing machines. There is usually an insert explaining Roberts’ connection to Which? so this is good exposure to the idea of a consumer guidance magazine, where most of the membership have been described previously as being professionals middle and upper middle classes, so they’re reaching that audience again. 

The gardening tips are again very similar to those in the Times, though with the occasional reference to readers writing in with points or questions. The chemicals added were to restore the soil and ensure good growth, with any ill effects being due to the user not using the correct amount at the correct time, all of which requires more knowledge about the soil and plants that the article can give or really explain how to work out for oneself. Weeds haven’t been dealt with so much actually, as in the Times, there haven’t been any mentions of lawn dressings etc. Maybe do another search for weedkiller. Also veg growing. 

Salesmen etc required ads show that household ammonia is still listed quite late (1960s?) as being something that needs to be sold to ironmongers etc. 