backing up why newspapers are important - Tosh
readership
limitations
	impact
p318
"Court and crime reporting have provided a rich seam of evidence for historians to mine; but one unintended consequence of the concentration on this aspect of popular journalism has been an over-emphasis on the press as a conservative and unforgiving arbiter of morality and respectability. In broader social and cultural histories of twentieth- century Britain, this is particularly evident; the main role of the popular press seems to be to whip up moral panics about deviant behaviour or to identify and attack threats to social and cultural status quo."  " In almost every case the press is presented as a reactionary and irrational force, simplifying and distorting, prone to ‘sensation’ and ‘hysteria’, with competition between papers and between media forcing journalists into ever greater excesses."


Tunstall
p11Sun Daily Mirror and  Daily Star -  lower tabloids
light news, entertaining, human interest : crime ,sex sport television show business and sensational human interest stories. 
look-at material - pictures, big headlines, advertising also mainly display which involves pictures and big headlines. Remainder of tabloid is quick read material, with most so tires less then 400 words. 

p12
broadsheets carry longer stories, assumption is of a serious but selective reader who will want to choose some but not all serious financial news,  or serious art, or serious domestic apolitical and foreign coverage. 
broadsheets rely on advertising while tabloids rely primarily on sales or circulation revenue. 
broadsheets attractive to display advertisers who are selling expensive consumer products - expensive cars or clothes. In order to remain as vehicles suitable for advertising highr sallied jobs and upmarket consumer products, and to gain high rates form advertisers - the broadsheet paper must retain high proportion of edciatied and affluent readers. Prestige seeking not out of line with commercial goals. 
p13 Tabloids do benefit from carrying advertising. 
Sun - market leader - only 30% of revenue from ads in 1993

p15
Midmarket leaders
Daily Mail leader from 1896 launch for 35 years, then in decline for the next 40
especially turbulent in the 1960s
merged with Daily Sketch and changing to tabloid size in 1971
David English as editor for 20 yrs and won back midm market sales lead 1987
depends on star columnists an interviewers and on lengthy human interest features. 

p157
1968 - Crime and football were classified as having and audience or circulation goal. Crime journalism grew larger and more political, while public relations efforts by pressure gropus and the police became more sophisticated. says ref 3

motoring and fashion were classified as having an adverting goal - both fields popular with groups of readers, the fields made greater concessions to adeptsers than were found elsewhere. 
The main news sources were also the main advertisers in these fields, and were allowed to dictate embargoes between then new cars of fashions were first seen by journalists and then reported. 

p158
subject specialists engaged in cooperation. club members would give to any fellow specialist a press statement or a fact which was generally available or would become available well before the evening deadline. More intimate top operation which involved regular partners - usually 2-3 journalists on different papers - who systematically worked together. e.g. a Daily Mail specialist and a Daily Telegraph specialist might make ten of 20 required phone calls each and share the results, either face to face or by phone. Widely believed that partnerships bewtn nouns not in direct competition  were more acceptable. However, partnerships between directly cometing specialists are more helpful - covering same story in same way, cuts out most severe competitive threats and reduces the chance of your missing the story. 

study identified 14 DM and 10 Daily Express specialists involved in exchange partnerships. at least 2 examples of DM cooperating with speclsts from the Daily Express, Mirror, Times, Daily Telegraphn and the Sun. Jeremy  Tunstall Journalists at Work p205-49. 

environment - Robert M Worcester 'Are newsrooms bored with Greenery?' British Journalism Review 4/3 1993 24-6 David Longman and Colin Lacy 'Despatches from the doze-zone' British Journalism Review 5/2 1994 49-53

p173
naming journalists
Times almost completely anonymous until 1966
(p159) 1968 specialist  correspondens complained that 'by-lines' the journalists name ttached to the story - were used as a disciplinary device. If a news executive was unhappy with some aspect of the special it's performance, the by-line was wirhtdrawna dn the story app red without a named author. 

p201
instant press star - unknown in real life drama Ordinary person confronted with extraordinary circus. Many tot these stories concern babies and small children - the snatched baby, the sexuall abused or the physically handicapped child. 

p204
by 1960s British papers had been using photos for over half a century. Daily Expressand Daily Mirror were the leaders. But since 1960s photos have become more central to all types of newspapers. Trends towards tabloids, section and more competition encouraged greater use of picture.s 

The times which in 1965 carried only classified ads on it s front page, by 1995 often carried pictures of fashion models or entertainment starts to attract the casual purchaser. 

p207
crime generate a strong supply of good stories. 2 inhibitions - restricted nature of the formal regime - The British Police have followed the British central govts' highly secretive traditions. Moreover, British courts in gneral and the judges in particular place severe restriction s upon court reporting, sub judic rules strictly forbid pre trial speculation as to iil to innocence. Undermined in typically British ways : senior crime journos do set friendly reships w senior pliciemn ad judges. Restitction son pre trial coverage lead to massive courage during and after the trial. 
Britain has a lot of crime, mostly petty theft. Guns rare. Newsppaers evolved simple means for confronting these awkwards problems. Whilset most murders and rapes are committed by people known to the victims, the newspapers focus on the atypically dramatic cases such as mystery rapid and the fairly rare serial murder. 

p222
letters to the Editor - goes back to the origins of newspapers, impt to the editor who gets a quick return flow of comment about his editorial pronouncements. 1977 Royal Commission research suggested a total of about 2 million letters per year, in addition to the letter to the editor another sig category was letters tot ht individual named journalists. The 1968 specialists study showed 200 specialists each averaging about 700 letter a year, or 140 000 letter in total. 
since 1960s big increase in number of points at which sig now of letter arrive - specialised letter section i n sport, financial and womens sections. Growth of column writing generate new activity of letter to the columnists. Most steady trickle of letters, but hundred personal letters on specific topic is something which cannot easily be ignored. AS with specialist correspondents most contain routine observations or questions, while occasional letter become the basis of later columns. 
Fax + telephone = more immediate, e.g. readers votes on a topic, which can help the paper decide which side to come down on 


