News of The World

p128
paper contained features in the public service category that ran for years - missing people were reunited with their relatives through publication ofthei details in the Missin gFrom Home feature, and several million pounds in legacies were distributed to their rightful recipients through the Unclaimed Money feature - this column may bring you a fortune. 

Never reluctant to back and encourage what it regarded as good causes. As car owners increased, it encouraged readers to practise safety and courtesy, sponsored first road safety scheme when it launched the Knights of the Road Guild, looked out for acts of courtesy by motors and took not of reg number. 

after war, consultations that took place with RoSPA and road safety committees all over the country resulted in the formation of the rider of the Knights of th eRoad in Jan 1951. existed until 1970. 

p129
Alamain Reuninion - epitomised close relationship with the services. (dinner for holders of the Victoria Cross)
p130 sponsored the first British Games in 1920
paper entertained athletes in 1948 games. 
1958 sponsoring over 40 events covering 20 diff sports or there functions. 

p131 sponsorship and public spiritedness - launched public appeals on behalf of victims or families of victims. Close relationship to the police - fund for police widow. 

Advice to readers with problems - medical, legal, pension and insurance. 
Fro mthe replies of various individual experts a column of correspondence was assembled and became a popular features. Many readers cut out these columns and complied a diy reference guide to the various subjects raised. 
p132
1942 - invited readers to send individual problems to the News of the World where they were assured of getting sound nd reliable advice from a team of exports. Response= dramatic. Paper recruited Prof John Hilton to organise the advice. Familiar name = writer and broadcaster, prof of industrial relations at Cambridge Ini. Died, but in memorial his hname was associated with the feature for 30 years. Kenneth Barrett invited to take over direct of the advisory service, expanded with a professional staff to deal with legal educational and medical problems. Operated from Pffices at St Regis Cambridge, at the end of WW2 decided to centralise all papers advice services under the bureau, became a reader service without parallel in Fleet St. 

Barrett frequently called upon to give evidence before Roya Commissions and dept govt committees, he and his experts often able to influence govt policy. Consulted by Law Commission, review legal practice - bureau had its fingers on the public pulse. 
p133
1958 - over 3 million people had consulted it. Policy of bureau to neglect nothing, to take trouble over everything, to seek justice and help for the reader no matter what is the nature of his problem, to deepen the ties between the NotW and its immense readership. 
University of Social Knowledge
still necessary when not only had a Welfare State been created, but legal aid had been extends, a NHS and network of other personal and public advice and aid schemes set up. Precisle because so many agencies, there were inevitably gaps and administrative anomalies that the bureau experts specialised in bridging. Porlems oninties to flood in until the expensive service, was discontinued in 1972 - (£100 000 /pa) 
spin off- letters often reffered to the news desk - further investigation / expose

p134
archive taken on by Sussex University
1973 decision made that the same info could be given editorially, at less cost. 
Unity Hall - tough all round journalist, agony aunt. 
frank, straightforward and down to earth

p137
Captain Cash - money to the hard up, various campaigns - spin off investigation into anopthalmia, being born without eyes, after paid for a toddler to have artificial eyes fitted thinking it was very rare. Letters poured in form other parents of children similarly afflicted. Almost all letters from rural areas - possibility of link with pesticides. Could be scandal as big as thalidomide, demanded govt inquiry. Also launched fund to help children, starting with own donation of £10 000.

p141
Before legal Aid Act 1947 accused person had to rely on a dock brief. Not unusual for a notorious criminal's defence to be paid for by a newspaper in return for exclusive memoirs, w/o any financial benefit to the accused. 
1949 - John George Haigh - acid bath murderer. 

p149
Norman Rae - crime 
covered around 2000 murder cases, finest crime correspondents, remarkable ontacts among criminals, police and judiciary. Senior detectives would delay the start of a press conference - and judges their summing up - until his arrival. 

investigative journalism
sex - well covered, probably nothgin really I can attach to on this
p257
dole fiddlers - sting operations, 
p258 
bait
after publishing expose, Dept of Health and Social Security moved in to make own inquiries. 

p259
animal welfare - NoTW led the field in exposing animal cruelty
League Against Cruel Sports - Maureen Lawless
Ron Mount - fox hutin
put selves into dangerous situations, risking physical violence and receiving threats to their lives. 
beagle breeding for labs
p260
brought about govt legislation after following truckloads of sheep being illegally despotched from Britain to slaughterhouses on the Continenet in appallingly cramped conditions. Result- banning of live animals from being exported. 
stag hunt in West Country - pose as tourists and hunt followers
dog fighting - Liverpool, Ireland
p262 bader baiting 
