Arwen Mohun **Risk**



Looking at the power mower industry int he US as a really interesting comparison: 
gardening
men
mechanical (vs Chemical)
instructions

p241
advocates of consumer safety argued that constant technological innovation meath that consumers could not be expected to understand let alone manage risk on their own. Products old and new were held u pro a new kind of scrutiny. 
p242
results satisfied no-one but they proved effective at expanding the reach of safety professionals and the sate into what had been the domain of private enterprise and personal choice. 
power rotar mowers entered mass market 1946
early mid 70s, around 7 million mowers sold annually. 
Middle class could not count on hiring working class people to clearn the floors or end the garden, the mower offer compromise to the do it yourself, with the added thrill at least for some users (mostly male of getting to play with a machine.

the fast moving clade was the invisible snake  in the paradise = if it came into contact with an objet with more inertia than a dandelion - a foot or hand - the results were often a swift and bloody amputation. Rocks etc had thte momentum of the blade transferred to them = missile. A lot of people stuck their hands under their mowers, to clear glass clogging the dxit chute, ran over their own or their children's feet or inadvertently launched missiles at passers b. Othere handling the gasoline were injured. Movers coming apare. By late 1950s 80 000 serious injuries a ear. User agency involved in mower accidents, including consumers useing mower in ways unintended, unitagined and sometimes expressly warned against by the mfcrs. 
p243
none claimed mowers were harmless. Public debate centred on whether mfcrs should make effort to protect consumers from :careless" behaviour. Uderliying discussion was unstable distinction between voluntary and involuntary risk - the kinds of accidents users could anticipate and avoid and those that they could not. 

While state regulated some products (drugs) where risks were invisible to consumers, the risks of mowers were supposedly obvious. Regulatory law was silent about how mfcrs of this kind of consumer product should take safety into consideration. 

Market place became site of negotiation about mower risk. 

Consumer advocacy groups took the lead - manufacturers were represented by a trade association. 
unclear how much influence consumers union/ research published tests on mower had on consumers. They gave the Consumers Inion a rep for independent technical expertise. 

p244
trade association concluded industry had an issue with product safety  and blamed small scale mfcrs churning out shoddy goods, as well as careless users. Commissioned American Standards Association to write a safety standard for mowers. Desire to make a safer product and tool for pushing the most fly by night mfcrs out of the market. 
ASA delivered document unlike other standards: it had 2 parts, specs for mfcrs and suggestions for user. 

p245
strict liability 0 plaintiffs no longer needed to show evidence such as documents or testimony demonstrating that a producer behaved negligently. If the product caused injury that was generally proof enough that manufactures had not given enough attention to warning, safeguarding or redesign. Set of guidelines issued to legal profession, Second Restatement of Torts, sealed this change into legal doctrine. 
strict liability forced manufacturers to image in the user not as the proverbial reasonable man but as a person likely to ow a hedge with a lawn mower, or to leave the house with an iron turned on. 

Regulatory climate changing - Kennedy called for expansion of federal regulatory overusedgh to consumer products. Consumer Bill of Rights. 
1950s protecting children from unsafe products - safe issue for Dixiecrats and anti-New Dealers (?)
1960s - attracted liberal politicians, as it was a middle class issue, offsetting extensive govt efforts on behalf of the urban poor.

p246
doubts about making a voluntary standard work at all. Window dressing. Should be mandatory. 
revise standard when no machines met it. 
p247
culture shifted to accommodate the expectation of safety as right, injury epidemiologist and consumer product safety advocates had not dudeeded in shifting the popular perception that experience, skill and carefulness were more important than statistics in predicting accidents. Very vocal minority of Americans opposed the new standard. All for safety in the abstract, or in circumstances where they had no sense of personal control over risk. Furious about unccesccwsary govt interference in their rights as citizens and consumers. 
Resented paying for or being inconvenienced by what they saw as other people's carelessness.  - singled out recommendation that mfcrs include a means which users could quickly stop mower blade. Supposed to specify performance, not design, but seems to have been understood that the regulation was calling for a so called deadman's switch. 
Self identified conscientious consumer - Susan Wendeln - schoolteacher - believed in safety devices. Reseanted paying extra for deadma's switch and other safety devices. Believed accidents only happened to careless people. Even with free safety lessons some popel will refuse to heed warnings until their own mistake teaches. them. 
donald robers "get off our backs! the lawnmower I have now is an abomination compared to the old one. No more of your do-gooder improvements. 

p248
Picked Consumers Union to write the standard as had reputation of being an advocate for users. Testing process did not include a good way to imagine or observe how ordinary people used products. In their 30yrs testing mowers, CU engineers gained credibility by developing 'scientific' testing techniques satisfying need for seemingly objective basis for standards. Using the epidemiological information about accidents, they constructed a picture of a user who was unsell consciously bound for self destruction. 

Irate letters were taken into account and standard was rewritten. Blade still needed to be stopped, but machine should be easily stared again. Infuriated manufacturers as this was a technical problem with no easy low cost solution. They sued the Consumer Product Safety commission. 