Fireworks

Explosives Act 1875
		factories licenced by Secretary of State, inspection by the Inspectors of Exploives as are the contents of fireworks. Retailers of fireworks register premmises with local authority:  for storage and to ensure that sales are ot carried out to children appearing to be under 13, and offence to throw or set off fireworks in a street or public place
Fireworks Act, 1951
		prohibit mfc of fireworks considered dangerous in public posession
		
		
Homemade fireworks - 100 accidents in 1968 (2000 firework accidents total)


Ammonium nitriate not used maliciously, according to Wikipedia, until 1970 in university students at U of Wisconsin-Madison, then the Provisional IRA in 1973

Henry Stanhope. "The will to blow the lid off Ulster still remains strong." Times [London, England] 8 Nov. 1974: 16. The Times Digital Archive. Web. 22 Apr. 2013.		
		Strong case for banning the use of fertilisers which contain ammonium nitrate, the base of the majority of IRA bombs in both countries

Debates in House of Commons

1972
http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=1972-06-05a.156.3&s=terrorist+ammonium+nitrate#g156.5 

“About 19000 lbs explosive material has been used so far this year [1972] by terrorist organisations, of which about two-thirds hasconsisted of either ammonium nitrate or sodium chlorate. These are increasingly used in lieu oof or in combo with glignite and it is possible that other subs will be introduced when a supply of these is denited to the terrorists. 

Section 3 of the Explosives Act (Northern Ireland), 1970, enables regulations to be made controlling the manufacture, sale, acquisition, transfer, storing, transportation, handling, use or disposal of explosives. The definition of explosives is that set out in the Explosives Act, 1875, and includes any substance used or manufactured with a view to produce a practical effect by explosion". Ammonium nitrate is used very largely as a fertilizer and sodium chlorate as a weed-killer; neither is manufactured with a view to its use primarily as an explosive. It is, therefore, necessary to extend the definition of explosive for the purpose of the 1970 Act.

...Accordingly, after 30th June of this year it will be an offence for any person to have in his possession or under his control, or to use, the substances mentioned. I should perhaps make it clear that the ban applies not only to ammonium nitrate but also to mixtures containing more than 79 per cent. ammonium nitrate, since mixtures above this concentration can also be readily used as explosives....As I have said, the substances covered by the regulations made under the order are ammonium nitrate and sodium chlorate only, but it is possible that other substances will be used for unlawful purposes as an alternative to these.

...one wonders why such a Measure was not introduced before....If there is not overall control of these substances, as well as of explosives themselves, in this country, will it not be relatively easy to get these materials into the North of Ireland? If there is no reciprocal action by the Government in the South of Ireland, will it not be easy to get these substances into the North from the South? This is something which ought to be discussed by the Government with the Government of Eire. I sometimes become perturbed at the thought that explosives, gelignite and now these substances can be taken into the North of Ireland from this country. Is there sufficient control over explosives this side of the water?

As has been said, the order is coming rather late in the day. Most of us have known for a long time that these substances have been used in conjunction with gelignite in causing explosions in Northern Ireland. The main reason why sodium chlorate was used was that, when used in conjunction with gelignite, it was easy to start a fire with it.
I ask the Minister whether he has any plans to put advertisements in the local newspapers throughout Northern Ireland about these substances. Is he aware that practically every householder in the area in which I live and represent has supplies of sodium chlorate for weed killing? Farmers will have to pay a little extra to substitute the other fertiliser known as ammonium nitrate. Many chemists' shops have large stocks of sodium chlorate and they advertise them in the local Press every week for use as weed killers. The order states that after a certain date it will be illegal to have such stocks and one must notify them to the authorities. What penalties will be imposed if someone does not know about this and is found with these stocks?

The urgent matter is not an increase in the price of fertiliser. The problem is not how the chemist will dispose of his surplus stocks. I have information fairly regularly from across the water, so I am not wholly ignorant of events there. Those who are bombing unfortunate working people are using much more sophisticated methods than agricultural chemicals.
Like others, I should like to know what other proposals there are outside the order for controlling the acquisition of explosives in this country. Although these substances are not so much used now in the coal mines because of mechanical cutting, I know from my background in the mines that it was not difficult for miners to bring out of the mines every day a few sticks of powder in their pockets. There was no difficulty in obtaining the supplies which could easily get across the water and be used for wrong purposes.[Will the NCB be persuaded to look into this?]

It is almost universally agreed that the effect of the order, if passed, would be marginal. Such explosives as we have been discussing clearly will be obtainable from the South. They already exist in the no-go areas and they are so widely obtainable that it is almost true to say that we are being asked to pass a measure upon the ground that its effect will be incredibly small. That is no reason for opposing it. Of course, we support the order; I do not think we have heard anyone who is not willing to support it.

As I said in opening the debate, for those who find it necessary to continue to use or handle large quantities of these chemical fertilisers and weed killers, a system of licensing is being brought into operation. Those who need to hold or use large quantities of these materials should, if they require a licence, contact the Ministry of Home Affairs. Notices to this effect have been inserted in a number of Northern Ireland daily and Sunday newspapers, farming journals, farming supplements and on news and television transmissions. As a result of that publicity 300 application forms have already been sent to inquirers and about 65 completed forms have been returned.
The process works in the following way. On receipt of an application form inquiries will be made into the bona fides of the person concerned and efforts will be made to see whether there are suitable alternatives. The police, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Agriculture and the Department of Forensic and Industrial Science are consulted and, provided that the Ministry is satisfied there is a need and there is unlikely to be any danger to the public, a licence will be issued. Wholesalers and retailers will be required to keep a register showing the receipt of sale of the substance concerned. There will be additional powers under part eight of the licence. It will state the licence number of the purchaser, together with his name and address and the quantity purchased, and other details will have to be entered. As regards receipt of the substance, the date of receipt together with the quantity and name and address of the supplier will be shown. Local inspectors will inspect registers from time to time. That is the system which will meet the needs of those who under this arrangement find that they have to continue to sell, handle or use very large quantities of these chemicals and who can find no alternative.
A number of hon. Members have raised questions about those who have to find alternatives and the cost involved in going over to alternatives. I shall try to answer them. If farmers find that they cannot use stocks of prohibited ammonium nitrate fertilisers or other materials by 30th June, they will be advised through the Press to get in touch with the Ministry of Home Affairs in good time. The Ministry will then consider issuing the farmer with a licence, or alternatively will buy the stocks from him. The purchase price will be related to the cost of buying alternatives and will take account of any change in subsidy rates.
Arrangements were made with the wholesale suppliers of sodium chlorate for the disposal to the trade in Great Britain and elsewhere of all existing stocks held in Northern Ireland. Suppliers will be recouped any loss they suffer as a result of resale. I hope that this meets the worry about compensation which was raised by a number of hon. Members.

The present position in the United Kingdom is that my right hon. Friend the Minister of Agriculture is looking into the question of control in the United Kingdom. The position is somewhat different this side of the water in Great Britain since the volume is far greater. The question of manufacture has to be taken into account since the main manufacturers are in this country and larger problems of scale are involved.

...My hon. Friend the Member for Esher (Mr. Mather) raised again the question of the amounts of explosives which have been found and the measures taken to find explosives on the border and elsewhere. This is a central part of the whole security operation. I would not like him to think that there have been no successes. There have been some very substantial catches indeed.
Only last week there was an enormous take of almost 600 lb. of sodium chlorate. All the time these catches are taking place on the border and near it.

In a sense, of course, this very order arises from a situation which reflects, in some ways at any rate, a change in the security situation. It arises from the fact that it has been necessary for terrorists to use more chemicals; it has been found that they are less able to get gelignite, and the reason for that is that the control of movement, and on the sale and on the handling and on the smuggling of gelignite, has become very much tougher and is forcing them to use these chemicals, and creating a situation in which an order of this kind, although it may only appear a small order, and although it is only part of the overall programme, will, we believe, have some effect in improving the security situation, in reducing the chances that the terrorists can go out and continue their campaign of maiming and assassination. That is the purpose of bringing forward the order.



