The Role of the Pathologist in the Investigation of Fatal Poisoning
C. J. Polson
Med Sci Law, October 1965; vol. 5, 4: pp. 203-210

p204
mental defective received from another patient a cupful of a solution of sodium chlorate to drink. Death 14 hrs later. non-specific ill effects, but post mortem appearances were unequivocal. 
hypostasis to the eye had a silvery slate-brown colour but in colour transpeanceies was brown
organs brown, 
blood now the consistence of cream had a deep chocolate colour
analysis by Mr Osborne Home office forensic science lab harrogate confirmed poisoning by chlorate
stomach contained 230 mg sodium chlorate. A large canister labelled as sc 'non-poisonous' was in an outhouse accessible to the patients. Sc was also present on the adjacent floor and in fluid in a botle at the scene.
FM 10655A Professor Polson (HM Coroner, Craven District, WR, SE Brown )
[ further details given in  Some Hazards of Accidental Gassing
Lieut.-Colonel J. C. Crook
Med Sci Law, January 1966; vol. 6, 1: pp. 29-36.
Frank Whitaker West of Ilkley Yorks was charged with the manslatughter of a youth of 17 by his criminal negligence in the keeping and handling of phosgene. Sci Correspondent of Yorkshire post said that the hearing resembled a chemical symposium more than a trial and that even the experts were treading on unfamiliar ground. trial highlighted the fact that there is no legal control over the sale of phogene and that anyone can buy this highly dangerous substance provided the suppler is satisfied by the bona fide credentials of the customer]


pathologist wikeen sense of smell may readily detect poisons which have a characteristic odour

child 9yrs recovering from chicken pox left alone about 1hr in bedroom. mother found her face down across bed, dead. nothing to indicate cause of death. post mortem examination a fleeting odour id'd as ctc. Brain when reserved for analysis was placed in a closed receptacle on removing the lid a few hrs later - strong odour of ctc. Death due to poisoning by inhalation - present in lungs, absent from stomach. fleeting odour might have been produced by swallowing vapour. 4oz bottle half full and corked of  proprietary cleanly fluid nearly pure carbon tetrachloride on a ledge in arms reach.. no pad or cloth from which this child could have inhaled it was found, but it transported that not long before he death the child had told a neighbour that she liked he smell of this cleaning fluid. It is presumed that she had been sniffing from the bottle and had spilt some on her bed. She had recorked and replaced the bottle but lain over the spill and inhaled a fatal amount.
FM 10, 024 Dr Gee  (HM Coroner, Craven District, WR, SE Brown )  []

p206-7
youth 17yrs 0 taken seriously ill jan 22 1964, died at 2am next day. circas pointed to poisoning, but obscure. severe pulmonary oedema, without any sign of irritation or other changes. A strong smell which the lay people likened to that of chlorine had been noticed hat evening near Ilkley Moor. The possibility of phosgene furthered by clinical history of a delay of about an hour. two others in same house taken ill but recovered. Man responsible proved a wily evasive person - police tracked down the purchase of cylinders of physgene by a mfc chemist in a small way of business who conducted his operations at his home, in his greenhouse and it appeared on the neighbouring moor. His speciality was the mfc or nitromethane and he also mfc chloroform ate for which he required phosgene. He had led ICI to believe him to be a responsible person operating at a lab at Thorp Arch ex-munition factory. He had recklessly released a quantity of phosgene near his home and gas travelled down tto the deceased's house. FM 9,649A Dr Hainsworth)  (HM Coroner, Craven District, WR, SE Brown )