The No-Work Garden Book

first published UK 1976
(USA 1971) 

Foreward to English Edition by Robert Waller [editor of Soil Association Journal, env author and joynralist and has been agricultural producer on the staff of the BBC]

...Don't make a fetish of hard work when you can do just as well without it  - and isn't that a definition of efficienty when you come to think of it? = maxium output for miniuume expendite of energy. 

px
all-the-year-roud mulching system parctises and expounded by Rtuh Stout - aka in America as the Stout method - is for the person who loves growing veg, fruit and flowers of good quality byt who doens't want to spend all his leisure time int he garden. .. Advantage of this system is that it requires the least labour iwthout any sacrifice of the quality of the product. Achieved by cooperating with the naturla process as closely as possilbe. 
timid mulching - be bold

pxi Mulch for garden-proud types is liek dust on the drawing room piano. For a mulcher housever a neat and tidy garden looks like a *starved* garden and what's more it is!... I met a lady the other day who wouldn't eat her husban'd tomatoes because he had put dung on the soil - she thought it wasn't nice. 

We won't quibble about defining organic - what it should mean is workin giwth the energies of nature and not against the.. 

xii let the composting take place witht the optimium intensity where the fruit flowers andveg are actualy growing ; theren' no need to cart it to them. Nature just allowes leaves and other decayign vegetation to drop down on theearth where it composts. 

Nature abhors bare soil, just as much as she is said to abhor a vaccum. You don't see bare soil under natural conditions. .. Oly misguided man ploughs and clears his land so that it is i left natke to the wind and rain. A cold soil kills off the life in the top soil

xiv urban gardeners who cussessfyllly apply the mulching system without hay or starw. Myst grasp the idea behind mulching - keep the soil covered, warm and moist with materials that will rot down, such as old sacks for instance. 
I'm surprised they don't  mention old saks though they do refer useing soaked cardboard and newspsers. Old sacks are best if you can get them. I have  friend a surgeon who loves gardening but has v litle time for it and he covered his garden with sakc which he buys form loacal coal merch when the sacks are worn owut. Cuts holes in the sack for the larger plant to grow through. Flourishing weed free garden on which he only spends a n hour or soa a week = no diggerna dno hoes is rquired. 

p4
I haven't used any kind of poison for bugs for years
p5 I stopped using poison sumply because I hated the thought of them. 

p22
When I first started to have a garden I naively accepted for about 12 yeas evertyhgin that experienced gorwers told me. For instance it didn't occr to me to question the notion that the soil had to be durned over each year. And chemical fertilise should, of course, be tossed aroud, even though you hated the smell. Then too, spray young plants with poins however reovlint that idea might be to you. I read garden books and mag articles tryin not o tnotices that the writers often contradicted each other. 