**draft information sheet**
#Chemicals and Their Users in the British Home 1930 to 1989

You are invited to participate in a group reminiscence session or oral history interview as part of a PhD project entitled "Chemicals and Their Users in the British Home, 1930 to 1989" . This information sheet has been prepared to explain why the research is being done and what it will involve.  You can decide whether or not to take part. If you do decide to participate, you can change your mind at any time and are free to withdraw at any time, without giving a reason. 

##What is the purpose of this study?
Ordinary everyday life is sometimes seen as too mundane or obvious to be documented, but in this way it is forgotten. Participating in this project will help me, and any future researchers who re-examine the recording, to understand some of the context and user experiences that are not recorded elsewhere. This will contribute to a richer history of domestic chemicals than can be reseached simply from industrial history or promotional materials and objects, so in this way collecting oral histories will further the development of this field of research in social history. 

##Why have I been invited to participate?
This is a study of everyday life, so your memories and experiences of shopping for and using chemicals or chemical products in your home or garden are of interest. Your participation will provide an aspect which is often missing from histories of technology: the perspective of the user. I aim to collect at least 15 recordings of disccussions or interviews with people who have lived in Britain and used chemicals in their home or garden. 

##What will happen if I take part?
Sharing memories and thoughts about household tasks and hobbies involving chemicals (or perhaps deciding against using certain chemicals), talking more generally about the time period in question, of the personal experiences of using products could be quite a pleasant way to spend an hour, perhaps a couple of hours.

Upsetting memories could arise, or you may realise you have questions about the safety of products that you have used in the past. The aim of this historical study is to find out how you dealt with these questions as they came about and how they shaped your subsequent actions, rather than to provide information about the scientific effects of a diverse set of chemicals.  

##Will what I say in this interview be kept confidential?
It may be the case that you used certain chemicals for purposes that were not recomended by the manufacturer. All uses, advised or not, are important to this research. 

"A person or organisation in possession of information relating to criminal activities is legally obliged to disclose it to the police, if legal proceedings or investigations are under way in connection with those activities. There is no legal obligation to disclose information if no investigation is in progress and there has been no approach from the police". This is the wording used by the Oral History Society, and it is the action I will follow. 

You can decide whether you would prefer your contribution to be completely anonymous, through using an alias, or whether you would like to be identified by your name.

##What happens to the results?
The content of the recordings will inform my research and discussion. Excerpts from the recordings could be used as quotations within my written thesis or any other published material. Sound excerpts from the recordings, unless complete anonymity has been requested, could be played when I give papers or presentations on the work, or for a future virtual or real exhibition, depending on the quality of the recording. When presenting these excepts, they will be accompanied by contextual information to avoid misrepresenting your views or actions. 

The recordings, notes and transcripts that I make as part of the interview will be retained in accordance with the University's policy on Academic Integrity, which means that they will be kept securely filed for ten years after the project is completed in case anyone queries my thesis. 

The AHRC, who has funded this research, would like the data to be made available to any researchers who request them. The social history resource that you have helped to create will be valuable to academic researchers and for exhibition curators. 

##What should I do if I want to take part?
Please leave details of how I can contact you to arrange an interview. 

##Who is organising and funding the research?
I am an Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) funded student in the department of History, Philosophy and Religion, which is part of the Faculty of Humanities and Social Science at Oxford Brookes University. 

##Who has reviewed the study?
I will submit the study to The University Research Ethics Committee at Oxford Brookes University who will review and approve, or advise improvements to this study. 

##Contact for further information
If you would like any further information about this research, you can contact me, Catherine Rushmore, or my supervisor Dr Viviane Quirke

T 530
Oxford Brookes University
Gispy Lane
Oxford
OX3 0BP

catherine.rushmore-2012@brookes.ac.uk

vquirke@brookes.ac.uk

