Tracy Brown R4Today prog 
transcript
Do you agree that this is going a bit far?

I think unfortunately the reports authors have really misjudged the environment that they’re throwing this into. I think they’re trying to offer something helpful in the absence of anything very conclusive but I’m afraid we’ve ended up with advice to pregnant women that’s been driven by a vacuum. Within that there’s a lot of rumours, as they themselves say there’s a over extrapoloation from studies whos results never get repeated. 

Maybe they’re just treating pregnant women as grown ups, they’re using the word empowerment, they’re saying here are the conflicting pieces of evidence, this  is the knowledge as best we can know it, now you make up your own mind. 

They may think they’re empowering women but I’m afraid we don’t make advice up on the fly. It’s a serious business. Offering advice, public health advice to people, in the first place I mean we have this huge bombardment of pregnant women which underestimates, erm I think they’ve underestimated the extent to which that’s going on with,that there are products, websites diets and all sorts of things offering women advice on what to avoid and the dangers they face. We get calls every week in the office asking “is there any truth behind this, I’m very confused”, but secondly I think this kind of making advice up on the fly really undermines the really very careful evidence driven advice that is given on, for example, taking folic acid where not only has the evidence been really carefully reviewed the impact of giving that advice has been really thought through. 

I suppose they might say if you wait too long for the evidence then its too late, and actually if it seems to be a possibility that  evidence might come to light in the next few years then its right to act now

Well then you end up with a random selection of things that people start avoiding. That background noise is rather important So if you have advice like, the headlines today, don’t paint the nursery and avoid nonstick frying pans, well where do you sit that alongside the problems of stress, the need for rest, and taking folic acid? If you’ve got this slew of advice, it will become random, which things women pick to do and which they don’t and that’s quite a dangerous situation. We also get cynicism, where people think “well these scientists don’t know what they’re talking about” so when you do have a serious public health message to give it will be treated with that same cyncicism. 


Prof Richard
people may take an alarmist view but all we’re saying is that we don’t know, all the different chemicals that we are exposed to in our environments whetherthey do or don’t have effects. But what pregnant women are faced with is information that comes from the media, particularly from the internet which makes very extravagant claims about all manner of effects and thats just using very selective peices of evidence so its not a balanced view. And when you’re in that sort of situation, it means that so many people use the internet people get their information just from the scaremongering sources, so it forces your hand, you’ve got to provide some guidance and information even though theres tremendous uncertainty, so we’re emphasising the uncertainty and we’re saying that if you’re still concerned and look if you feel powerless, I need to do something for my baby, then here’s what you could do. It’s not going to do your baby any harm, its going to require a little bit of sacrifice on your part, its going to minimise the risk of any chemical effects on your baby.

Butin all honesty when you tell someone to not use sunscreen or shower gel it gets to the point where you think “is anything that I do in my normal daily routine going to be acceptable?”.

If this makes people think “well I didn’t realise I was exposed to chemicals via these routes then I think maybe it is a step forward, its an educational step forward”

But if I was a pregnant woman, I’m not, but if I was, I would have broken these rules about 6 times today and I’m only just out of bed. 

Well, we’re not saying that pregnant women have to do this, because we’re saying that at the moment we don’t know

The interesting think I think is that we are all, babies young children adults even, we are exposed to an array of chemicals and we don’t know, the build up over time, the effect its going to have on us and on future generations. 

YEs. That’s the scariest bit. We still don’t have that understanding, and from the latest evidence it’s going to be another 10 years before we’re going to be in a position where as a scientist I could say catagorically “yes or no, this is not a problem”. It’s going to take that scale of time, so we’ve got to have some kind of interim plan where the way that we deal with it and the way that we deal with all the scaremongering that we get through the media.  