
Chemical Industries Assoc (Scottish REgion) & Institution of Chemical Engineers (Scottish Branch) 
One-Day Joint Symposium
Chemical Plan Site Selection and the Environment


1_1_4

The press
If only the press were not always seeking sensationalism and would adhere to carefuly worded briefings they can be helpful. However, in our exp, this is not often the case and freq they can be expected to stir up local alarm. Nonetheless we do try to carry them on the basis that we have nothing to hid eand are responsible industrialists. It can be most galling to find that the reporter has written his article before attending a well documented and illustrated briefing. 


1-2-1
session 1 paper 2 
pitfalls associated with site selection JRH Schenkel

SAfety of the surrounding popn has not always been taken into account when setting up a chem production plant. It would I suppose be true to say that most of today’s chem ind has been sited w/o the slightest consideration for the health or safety of anone but teh employees of the undertaking concerned. This is hardly surprising because until the time of the Flixborough disaster the potential for such harm had not ben fully recognised adn even since that date v few members of the public indeed in the K have been injured b sudden events occuring in the chem ind. 

Perhaps the first occasion on which it becamse realised that the potential existed to injure large nos of peopel if something went wrong was at the time of the Aberfan disaster. Perople stared to wonder whetehr some of th elg storages used by the chem indu could have a disasterous ffect if containment were lost. Voluntary scheme in 1972where lg storages of praticluar chems were notified and plants became known as Lister Major HAzzard Facotires. 


p2-8-1
Session 2 Paper 8
How to present the Industry’s Case to the Public
WC McMillan Chem Ind Assocn

Public opinion relected in legislation and in independant local action groups, is very much in evidence today. Much of this legislation and opinion, expressed through the newspapers, radio and television is based on a lack of info.


.... Rightly or wrongly, our society has gone for greater public involvemtn in decision taking. .... planning applications are pbulishe and planning comittee meetings can be attended by the public and repsorted in teh press. .... A local councillor notices that chemicals are involved “Wasn’t that the stuff that blew up at Flixborough? or on the Spanish holiday camp?”

Maybe he’s got it wrong, but its good for afont page headline in the local paper or an interview on local radio, and lotf of extra votes at the next election. 

Soon, correspondance starts in the papers. People are suspicious because the firm makes no comment. They are relctant to speak because everybody knows that the papers always get it wrong. Nobody would believe them if they pointed out that no one has ever been killed outside the fence of a chemical plant in this country. 

p2-8-2
...Lets look at some of the headlines which have conditioned the public to react unfavourably towards our industry and the word “chemicals”.... there’s a steady drip drip of storeis that wear away the public’s confidence: 
Cyanide at Hebend Bridge in Yorkshire. Methanol leaks in the drains at Welverhampton. Trichlorophenol menace near Croydon. An M4 spillage, an undidentified chemical in a 45 gallon drum. Cancer fear in Derbyshire - sinc chromate affects an employee. 

Cance ris the most emotive and newsworht dieseae in journalist’s terms. Link it with chemicals and they have a story! Thousands of death from smoking are immdediately forgotten when one mouse edevelops a tumour fomr a chemical product. 

Let’s turn to Britain’s new growth industry, the protest group. 
2-8-3
Canvey Island, on the Thames ahs had one for years. Thr group suceeded in persauding the HSE to carry out a special study - but were they happy with the outcome? They wer enot, and the recent Spanish tanker disaster has given them a new weapon in their fight. 

... MPs sitting on the fenc, would expect jump at hanc eof investment and new jobs in constituency... 
... the influenc of the clergy in these local group should not be underestimated. Durham Chemical’s expansion ahs been fiercely opposed by the local vicar. At Baglan Bay BP chems had to reckon with the Rev AntonyWintle, who accused the company from the pulpit of being a Big Bully.
... widely read book among employees interested in H&S is Pat Kinnersly’s The Hazards of Work and How to Fight them... desribed as worker’s handbook No 1, well written but its line is clearly to incite employees to militant action. 

HAzards Bulletin produced by BSSRS - british society for the social responsibility of science - blantently far Lef, selective in tmt but suceeds in impressing the faithful. Copies found every safety course run by the trade unions and Worker’s Education Assocn - revenue earner for BSSRS which was liming along until the H&S at Work Act came to the rescue. 

The Sheffield Group has friend sin the Sheffield PRess - both the Mornign Telegraph and The STar. Companies like Staveley Chemicals, Vinatex and BSC Chemicals ahve all suffered at their hands. ...

Biggest and best orchestrated campaigh so far... Shell /ESso plant at Mossmorran. The objectors are mainly middle class professional people who work in Edinburgh but who live ner their yacht marina. The whole issue has been distored by their steady and spectacular propaganda. 
p2-8-4
... no foolproof plan no easy answer
The firm that is seen to be part of the community will already have regular contact in the press, radio, TV, local politics, Rotary club, schools, WI, golf clubs, yacht clubs and all the rest. The commnity will recognise them as one of us and treat them accordingly when a planning application goes in. 

It may be unpopular to say it, but the chem ind is still living in the 1930s in its attitude to public opinion, the press, radio and TV.... Prevention is better than cure. Public fears need not arise if the company prepares the ground [for an expansion eg] well in advance of even the first step of an expansion. The maximum info as soon as poss should be the aim. [paper given in context of siting a chemical plant, but all his examples were to do with accidents] 