chemophobia

phrase definitely has been in use since 1981 -United States, but would expect that as these are international companies, reading international journals and attending meetings/ conferences, that the term would be known and perhaps in use in the UK too at this time if not before. 

http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=iwqn6XhsPLgC&lpg=PP1&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q&f=false   “Scared to Death” Absolutely no references, or any actual surveys or studies cited in this pamphlet. 

1989 symposium National ACS Meetin, Division of Chemical Education
“Chemophobia - An Educational Challenge”

so was on radar early on, the 90s generation are not the first 

http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=oRNe2tBcyw4C&lpg=PR7&dq=chemophobia%2090s%20first%20generation&pg=PR7#v=onepage&q=chemophobia%2090s%20first%20generation&f=false
Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, Volume 147 p. vii   1996

It should then come as no surprise the ath ’90’s generation is the first of mankind to have become afflicted with chemophobia, the pervasive and  acute fear of chemicals. 

What is a generatioVNN˙∆π0’s generation are those who are embarking on making responisble choices for independent life, or with people dependent on them, maybep;ol?~” this is described as economically active? perhaps this statement could be true. 

As generations are usually counted as those who were born in an era, then I disagree strongly with the statement that the 90s generation were the first to become afflicted with chemophobia. The word/term chemophobia was in use by 1981, being addessed at conferences and seminars, with scientists blaming media for supplying the public with poorly explained numbers. In 1986 the Rjmustry being viewed with suspicion, but what action did people actually take? 

Like the generation of children who are now well versed in the language of carbon, who allegedly go round turning the lights off that their irresponsible parents leave on, who in surveys express a high degree of anxiety for the future of the environment yet will not give anything of they enjoy (such as computer games or holidays abroad) up, maybe when they start to make their own choices for their own independent lives they’ll shift to making the kinds of choices that their educational exposure prepared them to. 

Is there a generation that is more self orientated, or would the fear of cancer affect any generation, no matter whether they were deemed more individualistic or more holistic? I could take the argument that selfishness with regards to a personal cancer risk could benefit many more people if they were also protected by changes in practices through demand in markets, or even by legislation. A professed desire to have an environment protected for ones grandchildren is again selfish as they are one’s genetic continuation, “future generations” would be less self orientated. Personalising a problem is a method to make people take notice and feel that it is relevant for them, but it is possible that this message is irrelevant to a good proportion of people. When considering  population growth, fears of the late 1960s and early 1970s expounded by Blueprint for the Future and Paul Erlich’s Population Bomb were unfounded but many people for a variety of reasons choose not to reproduce, or are unable to, so should not be isolated or alientated as if they don’t have a stake or any respect for future generations.


The Wellcome Witness seminar on environmental pollution conveys a genuine sense of the progress of science, that the immediate benefits that they were seeing completely blinded them to the potential for any harm caused by the same interventions. When research bodies such as the MRC, who could be expected to be composed of responsible and thoughtful people capabable of taking a long view, did not consider the fate of chemicals and really believed they could only do good it feels incredibly surprising. As a person brought up in the 80s and 90s, celebrating Reef Week along with Pirate Week, who subsequently went on to be spend time in labs with practicing scientists in aquaculture and agriculture, where the lore of experiments that could go haywire when you changed what deodourant or soap you used loomed large, I feel very aware of the connectedness and interdependency of systems. I can’t imagine how educated people could be ignorant of this. I suppose it is a sign of progress and the period I’m studying had major changes in understanding and leaps in technology like detectors. As plate tectonics now seems obvious to and accepted by anyone who looks at a map and imagines the capability of a molten layer to move an upper crust around, so to that a chemical may have effects other than the one that you intend to use it for, and that in combination with other chemicals those effects will be different again. 

Detection of chemicals and the tendancy for innummeracy and disproportion was discussed in the Wellcome seminar. Lovelock pointed out that a commercial version of his ECD had been in use in the States for some time, yet Carson only included wet methods in her book which give cruder, less precise results, concluding that perhaps the scientists who advised her were more familiar with those methods and happier to explain them to her. There was a general disgust with the media and the consuming public to be unable to take tiny numbers and see their true worth, that if it can be measured it must be a bad thing, and only one person tried to step in to say that the scientists must take responsibility for making clear these amazing numbers to lay people who don’t encounter them on a daily basis.  

Not sure what the popular understandig of the Ames test is, but here there is a suggestion that the relationship between dose and mutation is linear, so although this does not take into account the repair mechanisms and resilience of organisms, it could be a basis for “if it is detected, it must be bad” because here it looks like there is not safe dose and mutation can occur at any dose. The issue here is understanding mutation, and how many mutations will not have an effect on anything important, that there are vast areas of nonsense that the mutuation could occur, and that genomes are well adapted for encountering this type of issue. Also, this test was developed in the 1970s.

Cancer risk was pointed out as the driving force behind increasing awareness of the potential side effects of agricultual chemicals and that the hormonal effects of pthalates on reproductive issues pushed a new surge in popularity of Silent Spring. This is quite a different view to the idea that the natural environment, the countryside, was being adversely affected. Letters to newspapers about bird death after crop spraying, or seed planting, seemed to be the principle indication of concern about chemicals. The countryside was very important to people, it provided their food, a fair number of jobs, it was somewhere to live or to escape from the the cities (and to indisciminantly litter, as the cartoons show year after year), but perhaps not as important as avoiding a terrifying threat such as cancer, which would destroy your life or take someone away from you.

It was interesting in the Wellcome seminar that particulates in air pollution were blamed for grandchildren’s asthma being worse that his son’s at that age, whereas I have thought of asthma being linked to immune system and the effect that a household cleaned more vigoursly and powerfully with chemicals could have on making developing asthma more likely, by removing exposure to envrionmental antigens. 

