Bingham, Adrian
Family Newspapers?  Sex, Private Life and the British Popular Press 1918-78
Oxford 2009


Can I truthfully compare
sex advice and scandal 
to 
gardening advice and poisoning?

impact-
p9
impossible to tell whether published letters from readers have been edited, altered, or even invented, nor can the balance of opinion on the letters page be assumed to accurately reflect the balance of all letters received. 
	at least they reveal the views that the editors wanted to see voiced in the paper. 
	
p10
Peter Mandler - to avoid the pitfalls associated with cultural history, work harder to evaluate not only the meanings of a text, but also its relations to other texts, significance in wider discursive fields, its throw, its dissemination and reception. 

newspapers, like any texts contain a preferred meaning, but this can always be negotiated, resisted or ignored by the reader - see Encoding/Decoding in Marris and Thornham Media Studies - a reader. 

p23
James Curran - 
press's reliance on advertising revenue played role in maintaining right-wing predominance. Newspaper market not 'fee': advertising operates as sa concealed subsidy that favours papers with affluent readerships and discriminates agains 'alternative' and anti-business voices. "The impact of advertising" in Curran and Seaton Power Without Responsibility: The Press and Broadcasting in Britain 5th ed. 1997.

numerous examples of advertisers hostility to left-wing publications (?) does not give any
Limits to the influence of advertisers must be recognised
	- want large circulations
	- by 1970s popular papers were only obtaining between a third and a quarter of their revenue from advertising s(see Royal Commission on the Press 1977)
Advertising encouraged general ethos of consumerism. Inhibited the investigation of dubious or damaging produts (does not say which)
p24
if a big issue burst into prominence no amount of advertising influence could induce a newspaper to suppress it or even write it down. (with ref to value of patent medicines or damaging effects of alcohol and tobacco). 

self-perception of being a Fourth Estate - scrutinising the workings of parliament for the benefit of the public. 
press jealousy guarded independence from state, resisted special laws regulating activities, but subject to strict libel law, obscenity regime, contempt of court restrictions and the official secrets act, also censorship during war. e.g. Daily Mirror threatened with closure after damaging criticisms of the war effort. 

Rationing - newspapers in 1930s= 20 or 24 broadsheets
after 1940 - 4 or 6 page issues
statutory controls until end of 1956, plus two more years of voluntary system
production costs and newsprint prices rose. 
In some cases pagination levels did not return to pre war levels until the 70s or later. Daily express for example. 


p51
defining characteristic of pop journalism in early 20C was concern with the health and wellbeing of its readers. Needed to explore sphere of private life if were to engage mass audience, health was a topic recalled only by sex and money n terms of stimulating curiosity (said Northcliffe) - ref given is Autobiography of Norman Angell
Drs and medical experts = familiar presence
interest in public health  - stimulated high profile campaigns, e.g. Daily Mail's crusade in 1911 to promote wholemeal standard bread. 

could relate to the general fear of information about prophylaxis would encourage promiscuity? e.g. by giving so much info about paraquat, people would poison each other /themselves left right and centre? 
-------------------

garden v sex advice columns? 
definitely a different way of dealing with each - readers enquiries get much shorter answers in the garden column, though the situations are possible as applicable to a large number of readers as the sex advice. Not usually so serious as sex, as can always start again. 
Both are for pleasure. 
-------------------


p85
health risks associate with the pill - concerns about potential ill effects were prominent form the start
warnings afrom early 1960s about connection thrombosis and unknown longterm dangers received considerable publicity. In 1964 Daily Maol editorial reminded readers of the delay in discovering the risks associated with thalidomide <<--- this is interesting, thinking about the unknown long term effects and environmental chemicals, this was the boom time for this kind of thing to come into public consciousness. 

controversy over all the news angles ensured that the pill remained in the headlines and received far more newspaper publicity than any previous form of contraception.

p114
re. Kinsey report: We do not treat the public as babies. We do not want to censor their information
could this be relevant to the suicide and murder cases? Not censoring, not treating as babies, treat readers as responsible adults who will deal with the explicit information appropriately?


p125
news values of pop press, criminal and morally transgressive activities have trad received greater attention than the mundane realities of everyday behaviour. Crime and punishment staple of pop culture for hundreds of years. Authority of judicial process gave legitimacy to the coverage of subjects that would be considered inappropriate in other context, though had to use euphemistic stylee around the most explicit details. Court reporting = cheap, convenient and reliable means of providing human interest so tires that fascinated, entertained and shocked readers. 

p126
court reporting had sig effect on public perceptions of crime and by extension, the 'state of society'. Govts feared disproportionate crime journalism would causee anxiety among voters, damage reputation abroad. Worried about ability of being able to rehabilitate after public demonisation. 
first half of the centaur - critics - threat to public morality. Too much prominence, unnecessary detail, glamourising the protagonists. Might encourage imitation and experimentation. Moral concern peaked in the 1920s, high profiles campaign against excesses of divorce rooting, and in the 
p127
1950s when complaints about explicit crime coverage were sent to the Press Council (doesn't give ref for this one!) 
From the 60s anxieties about moral impact of court reporting faded, replaced by concern about the manner in which press's pursuit of scoops was creating obstacles to the operation of the law.  

see - Critcher: Moral Panics and the Media
Chibnall Law and Order News: analysis of crime reporting in the british press 

p145
significantly more direct reporting style of court reports from the 1950s
conservative MP Christopher Hollis protested that *'It is incredible that newspapers should be found ready to pander to a public taste for every detail' of murders with sexual motives. So long as the Press continue to grab at these storeis with an hysterical enthusiasm they must take a considerable share of the responsibility if from time to time other sordid and horrible cirmes of the same kind are committed*'Sunday Express 30 Aug, 1953, 4  this was in reference to the Christie case (necrophiliac sado-masochist, hair fetishist, psychopath)

p146 Mirror motivated by democratic impulse and detestation of hypocrisy - plain meanings in plain words so we can all understand them. 

p200 
investigations - into vice
'shocked' journos invariably called for 'tougher' action from the govt and police. .. not clear how much tougher the authorities could be without infringing on civil liberties. Still press continued to highlight prevalence of prostitution and demand action. 
p172
Tina Dalgliesh went so far as to obtain a position at a playboy club as a bunny girl to ascertain whether sex was being offered. These features, along with celebrity confessions, increasingly replaced the court report as the paper's staple. 
editors and mourns refused to address the inconsistencies of their coverage of prostituion - admitted that sex would always be both and sold and unrealistic c for goats to attempt eradication. 
p173
on the othe r hand, compelled to send out reporters to investigate the trade, bring it to public attention , denounce it and demand action from the govt. An easy day o manufacturing a moral crusade spiced with details of ilitic transactions and sexual transgression. 
Some did have genuine merit - such as Webb;s exposure of the Messina gang, had outwitted the police for years. Majoirty were routine, exposing nothing unusual.


p264
sex was presented as a source of entertainment but also as a subject about which the public required up to date scientific information. 




