Reading the news
RK Manoff. 1986

Sources Make the News
Leon V Sigal p9-37
p12
ordinary people appear int he news infrequently

Herbert Gans - Knowns (political, economic, social or cultural elites) feature 4 times as often as  Unknowns (ordinary people) as the subjects (who) of news stories. Not unusual for people in official positions to be in the news. 

Fewer then 1- percent of all stories were about abstractions, objects and animals. 

human interest story is news personified. 

p13
in depth interview - recurrent feature

p15 
news is not what happens, but what someone essays has happened or will happen. Reporters seldom witness first hand. 

objective reporting - no bearing on validity or truthfulness, only that it means the overt intrusion of reporter's personal values is avoided and explicity interpretation is minimised. 
p16
avoid value laden vocabulary , write in third personal impersonal, not first person personal. 

attribute the story (name sources). 
controversy - attempt to balance sources with confilicitn perspectives. 
Keeping the reporter out of the news means relying on sources. Who reporters talk to thus tells a lot about news. 

Processes and workings of newspapers mean that reporters must find news, they are confined by deadlines and geography. 

p17 - availability of government agencies information in a form ready for transcription 
p18 - legwork not random, network of contacts
routine channels for dissemination - press relaease, daily briefings, press conferences, background briefings (where identity of source is cloaked)

p19 protective coverage - protection against being scooped. digging for details, info and analysis that competitors don't have. 

authoritative sources - ability to exertise authoritativeness makes a source authoritative. Those designated to speak on company/org's etc behalf. Celbrties in 1920s and 30s were authoritative sources, opinions on any subject worth reporting (Einstien, Chaplin, Babe Ruth)  and by implication, worth accepting

p26
Journalists are absent from the news, usually. 

press can be obsessively self absorbed esp when it sees its freedom bien infringed. 
convention of objectivity dictates that the reporter leave himself out. [poss not interview/in depth]

1960s Pete Hamill - the new journalism came into vogue
by putting himself, personal impressions and conclusions  - called attention to self as author and news story as genre. Deliberate and self consiocu challenge to rephotircal pose of objectivity. columnists like Hamill could do this, but news reporters could not. 

p30 
effects of news content on the process of social legitimation seem difficult to measure, vary with the times and be marginal at most. Those who see news content as crucial to legitimation or deligitimation may only exemplify the phenomenon of selective perception of news by readers. 


The grisly ruth about bare facts
Carlin Romano p38-78
p38 
What does the press cover?
what it feels like covering
what sells papers
what the competition is covering 
what it can get into the paper by 10pm 
what it has always covered

the news, 
facts
government what's important

journalists don't have time to get philosophical. 

p39 
news and facts as words do not include rigorous investigation into the meanings of the words themselves. 
journalism isn't a legally recognised profession [?] like psychiatry or medicine 

old fashioned view that news si simply a mirror placed before reality still lives. Analysis = opinion
as if all the unlabelled sotries around it weren't also based on opinion and analysis. 


p40 if the test for news is that every newspaper would print it, many stories available each day are not news. If it is what some newspapers would print, floodgates optn to everything. 
Alan White, philosopher:
facts, unlike events, situations, states of affairs or objects have no date or location. Facts, unlike objects, cannot be created or destroys, pointed to or avoided. We cannot be overtaken by, involved in or predict facts as we can events.... Facts unlike situations and states of affairs don't *exist*.  Facts but not events, situations or states of affairs can be disputed, challenged, assumed or proved. Facts can be stated whereas events and situations are describe.d There may be facts about an event situation or state of affairs but non of the latter about a fact.

p45
what the press covered - content completely rational - principled reasons, not merely practical ones (e.g. it was the only story available on the wire) Can loosely define 'what the press covered as those matters that fit the various principles for particular sotreis. 
The press covers changes from the norm. Alone, this does not get everything new into the paper. 

t[46
the press covers controversy - issues which people vocally contend and seek action

press covers events causing large numbers of unexpected deaths 

letter remarking on 4 column photo on front page, p7 photo and map of Dam burst in Italy, killing 220, not one page 10 floods and mudslides in china killing 275 and affected 1.5 millions others - are natural disssters occurring in third wold commonplace, elected and quietly accepted. 

p47 Mort Rosenblum "well understood sliding scale: a hundred Pakistanis going off a mounting in a bus make less of a story than 3 Englishmen drawing in the Thames."

p48 symbolic events
formerly famous (once famous, always famous)
anniversaries - opportunity to be historians 
p49  press covered the possible
p50 press covers the easy - information flows so fully
p51 - tasteful matters
p52 0 the press covers its ass for layers - investigative stories, written with jury in mind so the paper will be able to demonstrate during libel trial how it bent over backward to be fair
covered stories that can win it prizes  - e.g. series (not one part)stories that provoke govt reaction or policy changes
p54 press doesn't cover events if doing so may cause the death of innocents - morality constrain press to exclude or hold a story. Eg nations security, or when facts in possession are not reported to preserve life. e.g news blackout. 
p55 does not on the whole cover the press - can't cover other newspapers objectively, ultimate lack of objectivity. Jounalistic institution that considers every institution fair game for examination but itself and its brethren. 

p59 
Gans - observations"The incomes of rich criminals may appear in the news, those of the poor do not. 
While breakthrough in the sciences are covered, those in plumbing or auto repair are not. Members of high-status professions, such as lawyers or doctors, are newsworthy,  whereas members of less prestigious professions such as accountants and nurses are rarely mentioned. 
Plane crashes are usually more newsworthy than the winter breakdowns of tenement furnaces even if they result in the same number of deaths." 

Gans - Deciding wWhat's news 

since Gan wrote - newspaper business sections have expanded

p60 By mixing previously separate coverage principles, single events exert enormous influence on news.  IfRock Hudson had not collapsed in public and acknowledged haven gAIDS - allowing the powerful principles of celebrity coverage and the weaker ones of medical and homosexual coverage to converge- the subsequent mass of AIDS stories would not have appeared.  

p61 There is no nontumpable set of reasons for a story appearing, no conditions exist that guarantee the running of a story on a particular day.

p68
press's use of the phrase 'Star Wars' - 
p69
identification of the actor or actors responsible for it: 
Democarat pro ducted the critical reaction to the speech. 
Senator Kennedy initiated use of the movie title tag
President Reagan protested
the only action that goes begging for an actor is the widespread adoption of the phrase. "Gained currency " is a passive construction that does not identify who gave it currency. Institutional media specialise in taking fresh phrases and beating them into the ground. Always friendly to simple minded tags that can represent complicated issues, the media jumped on it. Yet consider all the reasons why the press should not use the phrase. 
[relate this to the use of no known antidote when in fact there are no known antidotes in the true sense of the word to most other poisons" ]

p78 What the press covered matters less in the end than how th public erads. ... Awestruck readers abound everywhere. Even smug Ivy League English graduates trained to dissect the neuroses behind the prose of Virginia Woolf, or the poetry of TS Eliot, often read the New York Times or th eWall Street Journal as if Good himself (rather than som fellow Ivy Leaguers) had dictated it from the press from on Sinai. What these readers need is not change - not just flip flopped conventions - but instructions of the sort that come on any decent aspirin bottle. They need to stop and ask themselves - IF my life depended on proven the claims I've just read, how could I roa nyone do it? Where stories seem balance and objective, ask whether there aren't more than two sides to them. 





