notes from meeting
Must work on distancing myself from the sources, currently they dominate and make the work look like simple notes. Analysis will bring my voice above the sources. 
(I think sometimes I worry that I don't have an actual argument)
Leave out the names of anyone who is not an historian (e.g. the gardening manual authors), explain who the historians I refer to are. 
I should include more descriptive passages to give a better sense of the material culture - boxes, packaging, what chemicals look like, smells, equipment.


Structure and chapters
- literature review
- household
- garden (bridges the gap between chore and leisure, indoor and outdoor, male and female)
- photography
- commodities ?(I actually can't remember what we meant by this)
- users?
- conclusions

Gardening chapter should be worked on as a properly polished chapter and sent by late September, so that we can all see how things might go, will provide a template for other chapters. 
This means writing a more historical introduction, and knitting together the paraquat and weedkiller documents. Include contextual work on garden fashions, such as patios, paths, lawns and their links to needing different qualities in weedkiller - how the garden is used affects which and how the weedkiller is used.
I should also include a timeline or similar to help the reader know how these chemicals are related.

Paraquat is the dominant chemical here, most material for case study, so work on drawing out the continuities and differences between all the other chemicals to tie everything together: the uses have to be foregrounded here, the reputation of the chemicals, poisoning, explosions. 


Questions that arose during the meeting:
Was there a sodium chlorate, a lawn sand, a paraquat generation?
Is it a generational thing to get attached to products?
Are people inherently conservative about new products?
Do advertisers focus on any particular age group, do they bother trying to attract older users or are they after the people who are choosing products for the first time/ who are not attached?
How good are generations at passing on information about chemicals?

Remember to refer to the original bid document:
Be explicit about the un/branded chemicals and the transition between them
Look at the relationships between state, manufacturers and users

Consider the outreach component
	Brookes - speak to Tudor
	National Science and Engineering Week? March? Royal Society of Chemistry (Peter's contact)

For the museums component
	Museums - methodology
	Museums - visibility of chemicals, challenges of collecting and displaying
	:article with Peter perhaps?

Reaching oral history participants:
hardware shop owner - John's friend
gardening group
photography club
try to get some people involved in marketing chemicals?


