1.2 LAY DESCRIPTION:  Provide a brief outline of the project, including what participants will be required to do. This description must be in everyday language which is free from jargon. Please explain any technical terms or discipline-specific phrases. (No more than 350 words)
					
	My research on the topic of "Chemicals and their Users in the British Home" has been based on documents and product packaging. I am interested in the use of unbranded and branded chemicals and chemical products including household ammonia, soda, dry cleaning fluids, and garden weedkillers. In order to find out about the user experiences and motivations for choices, which are not visible in policy documents, adverts or packaging, I would like to interview people who used these types of chemicals to obtain a richer story of how chemicals have been invited into, or excluded from, domestic environments. I want to illuminate how branded preparations replaced unbranded chemicals, usually in the names of safety and convenience, and how this was actually experienced in the home.
	
The period I am examining runs from 1930 to the late 1980s, so this project is already too late to hear from people who used these kind of housecare chemicals. However,  it is possible to collect memories from people relating to the 1940s onwards, even if it is recollections of other household members using the chemicals or preparations. 
	
As the labour involved in detailed interviews is so great, the number will be limited, but to get a larger picture of the range of chemicals and brands used, I would like to use local papers or special interest magazines to distribute a request for written memories, which I envisage being shorter than a recorded interview. Respondents will be directed to either a web page, or to a freepost PO Box address, or to a drop-off repository at a specified location, depending on the form of technology they prefer using.  A website alone might exclude some of the older people I most want to hear from, which is why options to write longhand on paper are included.
	
	*General: give us a sense of timeline/shifts over time. Specific: spellcheck for typos and tell us here what sort of ‘ptompt’ you intend to use*
	
1.3  AIMS OF AND JUSTIFICATION FOR THE RESEARCH:  State the aims and significance of the project. Where relevant, state the specific hypothesis to be tested. Also please provide a brief description of the proposed research, a justification as to why this research should proceed and an explanation of any expected benefits to the community. Please provide full references for any work referred to. (No more than 700 words)


Although there are histories of problematic chemicals in the natural environment and investigations into the health effects of long term exposures to chemicals in everyday domestic or workplace settings (Warren, 2000; Murphy, 2006) I have not yet located scholarly research relating to the deliberate repeated use of chemicals in the home. Chemicals are a form of labour-saving technology: however they are barely mentioned in histories of domestic technology which tend to focus on durable mechanical appliances, for example Ruth Cowan's "More Work for Mother". 

I have selected a number of chemicals with household or garden uses for case studies and I have looked at features, letters and adverts in newspapers and widely available special interest magazines (e.g. Good Housekeeping, Gardening Illustrated, Which?). Oral history interviews or written memories can help to provide some information about the decisions to use or to not use these products that is not available through the material I have been able to access. The flexibility of semi-structured oral history interviews allows for the discussion of wide ranging contextual subjects which will help to enrich the story of how the interviewees relate to chemicals in general, to branded products, what it was like to go shopping for these items, perceptions of housework and garden care, what various and tangential occurrences (friends or acquaintances, school curriculum, film, TV, books) might have had an impact on the participants' motivation to use, or to avoid, certain chemicals or products. The benefit of interview over written testimony is that the interviewer can tease out topics of particular interest. 

Oral histories will shed light on personal decisions to use chemicals, where and how chemicals were obtained and the general practices of using of chemicals in the home and garden between 1930 and the 1980s. Although there are limitations associated with oral histories, they provide perspectives and insights not available elsewhere (Perks & Thompson, 2006).  ± 16 interviews is a manageable number to arrange and process. Interviews will include men and women who lived in urban areas, rural settings, areas near to and far from chemical industries (which might divide up into North and South) to provide material for comparison. Considering different users experiences will provide the opportunity to look at questions of gender, to compare necessity with leisure, and to explore users’ preoccupations about chemicals in general. The users may be concerned with their own and others’ health and the health of the environment. The financial costs of chemicals, branded preparations, the type of convenience they offer, perception of the final outcome may be involved in their decisions so questions regarding economics will also be important. 

The benefits of doing this research are that it will provide information on everyday life that has not been recorded in this way before. Those who might remember the early portion of my time frame are becoming fewer. The apparently mundane, banal subjects of performing housework and garden care are worthy of study because there are so many factors - including views of self, family and environments, economic considerations relating to time use and financial costs, branded and unbranded products - that impact them. 	

*General: relate this section more clearly to the aims of your project and its significance with respect to the existing historiography. Specific: you refer to brands here – they should be mentioned earlier and justified in terms of your overall project, i.e. how simple chemicals were eventually replaced/displaced by branded chemicals*

1.4 	PROPOSED METHOD:  Provide an outline of the proposed method, including details of data collection techniques, tasks participants will be asked to do, the estimated time commitment involved, and how data will be analysed. If the project includes any procedure which is beyond already established and accepted techniques please include a description of it. (No more than 500 words.)

Oral history participants will be recorded at their homes or a public venue in a conversational interview, where the interviewer (the principal investigator) has the bare bones of topics to cover and prompts to elicit answers relating to the research. Sample questions are appended. The interviewee will not be given the questions in advance, but from the recruitment process and information sheet will know that they will be talking about their own experiences of using chemicals at home. This is an established and acceptable way of undertaking an oral history interview, which should allow for relaxed discussion of the topic in question, rather than the delivery of rehearsed answers recorded for posterity.  
	
The information sheet will be reviewed before the interview commences, to ensure that the participant understands the nature of their involvement in the project, that they can take a break or terminate the interview without reason. When consent to take part in the project is obtained, the recording will start with the introduction of the interviewee and interviewer, the date and the purpose of the interview. 

Each interview is anticipated to take between 45 minutes and 2 hours, some may be shorter and others may be longer, depending on what the participant's loquacity. Consent and means of identification will be reviewed and confirmed at the end of the interview. The principal investigator will then transcribe the interviews as soon as practical, either in long note form or exactly. This process improves the familiarity of content and transcribing allows interrogation of the text to find themes, using close reading or technological methods such as NVivo. Not contracting out this task also avoids confidentiality or security issues. Transcripts and a copy of the recording will be sent to the participants for accuracy checking and courtesy.  


  

1.5	INVESTIGATORS’ QUALIFICATIONS, EXPERIENCE AND SKILLS
	List the academic qualifications and outline the experience and skills relevant to this project that the researchers and any supporting staff have in carrying out the research and in dealing with any emergencies, unexpected outcomes, or contingencies that may arise.

	Catherine Rushmore has been studying the histories of users and technologies in a variety of scenarios since 2005. This theme has provided two dissertations for MA (navigation aids and museum visitors) and MSc (condoms). Catherine worked as Science Curator at the Museum of Science and Industry 2009 - 2012, having started at the organisation in visitor services, then entered the curatorial  department as an assistant curator. As a curator she was trained by colleagues at the museum,  which included the theory behind oral history, limitations and benefits of oral history, practical considerations such as personal safety, sound quality and potential uses of recordings, copyright, confidentiality and informed consent, preparation of sound bites, issues around the longevity of digital media with respect to storage and retrieval. 
Catherine arranged, conducted and processed oral history interviews to stand in for objects that could not be collected themselves, and to enhance understanding of those that the museum already cared for, as well as to shape exhibition research and to provide future exhibition content.  

Undertaking interviews involved travelling to the agreed interview venue, requiring that safe offsite, lone working procedures were followed (notification of colleagues of location and time of expected return, carrying a well charged mobile telephone). Through experience, Catherine developed an interview manner which enabled the collection of relevant and interesting details about objects, events, institutions and practices. 

Catherine also attended a session arranged by the Science Museum, London in December 2012 which brought together PhD students using oral history in their research. Experienced interviewers, supervisor Dr Quirke was one, shared their advice on practicalities of recruiting participants, obtaining informed consent and directing interviews to ensure that research needs were met. 

Support in the form of regular email contact and face to face supervisions, as per normal PhD supervision is expected to suffice in the general carrying out of the research. Supervisors will be notified of the investigator's progress and any concerns as they arise. 

Dr Viviane Quirke has completed comprehensive training with the Oral History Society, and conducted oral history interviews as part of her original research, which are now deposited with the British Library. She is aware of the processes and sensitivities involved and is therefore well situated to support students carrying out this type of data gathering and research.  Dr Quirke has completed up to date training at Oxford Brookes University that supports her supervisory capacities.

1.6	PLEASE EXPLAIN WHEN, HOW, WHERE, AND TO WHOM RESULTS WILL BE DISSEMINATED, INCLUDING WHETHER participants WILL be provided with any information ON the FINDINGS OR OUTCOMES of the project:

	The results will be disseminated to the academic research community through the availability of the final dissertation and any resulting published papers on the Oxford Brookes research website RADAR. Conference presentations or teaching material could use either sound clips (if consented to) or transcribed extracts. 

Participants will be sent a copy of the recording and their transcript. They can choose to be notified of and invited to any public presentations of the research that might arise, for example through public engagement activities of the university or Science Museum (i.e. public talks, SMLates, temporary exhibition). If there is substantial recruitment from a particular area or organisation, then an event can be arranged to present an appropriate version of research findings, to acknowledge the participants and round off the project.   

*You may also wish to refer to the issue of storage and curatorship here*
This section is to do with results rather than raw data. Curatorship is covered through the activities of university or SM, but I have given examples.


NUMBER, AGE RANGE AND SOURCE OF PARTICIPANTS
	Provide number, age range and source of participants. Please provide an explanation for your proposed sample size (including details of statistical power of the sample, where appropriate) and state any exclusion or inclusion criteria. 

	Taking the age of 15 as when a person might regularly be doing chores that involve chemical products, participants will be aged 40 and over. There is no upper age limit, as long as participants are capable of giving informed consent to take part in the project. Participants will be selected to cover as varied a geographic area (urban, rural, Northern,  Southern) and time span as possible. The anticipated sample size of 16 to 20 detailed interviews is small, due to the workload of processing the interviews. 

The criteria for inclusion is a willingness to talk about their everyday household and/or garden chores and motivation for decisions regarding the use of chemical products to assist in these chores for any period between 1930 and 1989. The participant should talk principally about the experience they had in Britain, although they do not have to identify themselves as British, English, Scottish, Irish or Welsh.  

*I don’t think 16 interviews is a small number, it may in fact be too much if you are intending to transcribe them yourself. 8-10 may be enough*

*So how does this questionnaire fit in with your prompts etc? Probably best to flag this up earlier to show how it will fit in with the rest*
I think I clicked this box before deciding on the request for written memories, although I have drafted several questionnaires. 

*You may wish to use diaries as well if these are available?*
I interpreted this question as being diaries completed as part of the research - like a mood diary, or an eating diary - but I see your point. On the question of diaries, I had always considered that a separate issue, as I wouldn't exclude anyone from oral history on the basis of not having kept a diary, nor would I necessarily interview them on the basis of having kept a diary but it would be nice to have both. I'll check with Maggie what the form means.

2.3	MEANS BY WHICH PARTICIPANTS ARE TO BE RECRUITED
	Please provide specific details of how you will be recruiting participants. How will people be told you are doing this research?  How will they be approached and asked if they are willing to participate?  If you are mailing to or phoning people, please explain how you have obtained or will obtain their names and contact details. This information will need to be included in the participant information sheet. If a recruitment advertisement is to be used, please ensure you attach a copy to this application.

Some participants will be recruited through personal approaches by the principal investigator to contacts made during the project. Their contact details will either have been publicly available, or passed on through friends. Some participants will be recruited through activities at museums or day centres for elderly people. All participants will be provided with an information sheet, then following a positive indication of interest, will be presented with further information (recording agreement, copyright and consent forms) along with the opportunity to discuss them. When positive indications are forthcoming, the interview will be arranged. Without the recording agreement, copyright and consent being signed off, the interview will not go ahead. 


3.2  POTENTIAL RISK TO PARTICIPANTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES 
	Identify, as far as possible, all potential risks to participants (e.g. physical, psychological, social, legal or economic), associated with the proposed research. Please explain what risk management procedures will be put in place.
	
Participants can choose to use  a pseudonym if they feel that what they disclose in their interview puts them at risk once the interview is processed for use. The interviews will be stored securely on a password protected computer, backed up to an encrypted hard drive. Whole interviews and transcripts will be offered to the Science Museum, where if they would be available to researchers if the recordings were accepted, and extracts could be used in physical or virtual exhibitions. 

Participants will be assured at the start of the interview and reminded at any appropriate point during, that if they feel uncomfortable or distressed by remembering and discussing their experiences with cleaning or gardening products, or their beliefs about chemicals, that the interview can be stopped, temporarily or permanently. 

As some of the household chemicals under investigation could be used as poisons or explosives, regarding the disclosure by interviewees of any historic criminal activities:
"A person or organisation in possession of information relating to criminal activities is legally obliged to disclose it to the police, if legal proceedings or investigations are under way in connection with those activities. There is no legal obligation to disclose information if no investigation is in progress and there has been no approach from the police". Interviewees will be made aware of this during the consent process, and if the topic of criminality arises during the interview, the interviewer will probe to establish whether the subject was resolved, or never investigated.

*Yes so this needs to be mentioned earlier – and you need to tell us where they will be stored, whether you have obtained permission for storage etc. The issue of prior consent also needs to be flagged up earlier*

The consent form, which I haven't written yet, will deal with this in more detail. The ethics form asks for this to be attached. There is an entire different section on consent.

3.4  PLEASE EXPLAIN HOW THE POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE RESEARCH OUTWEIGH ANY RISKS TO PARTICIPANTS. Briefly describe the main benefits and contribution of the study. Include any immediate benefits to participants as well as the overall contribution to knowledge or practice.

The main benefits are access to memories, personal thoughts and rationales that are rarely recorded otherwise, giving insight into product choices, everyday practices and thoughts relating to the use or avoidance of chemicals in the household. Some of this information is available separately through reciepts, or diaries but these tend not to gather the details together, or with the kind of reflection elicited through these interviews. There have been substantial shifts in the visibility and availability of potentially harmful chemicals, there have been changes in labelling, packaging and retail in general, so to hear about these from the people who shopped and handled the goods complements the discussions on these topics recorded in parlimentary debates and newspaper articles . 

Reflections and statements from chemical users or nonusers are valuable because they are ordinary and generally not given a platform for expression. "Chemophobia" has been blamed for hostility to the chemical industry, reduced numbers of chemistry students, for the rise in "chemical free" sloganeering, but it has not been investigated appropriately to help understand how so many people do not come to behave in a particularly chemophobic manner. Nor does it help to understand why the variety of chemical products available to aid chores has continued to burgeon during the period under investigation. With serious concerns about pervasive, environmentally persistant chemicals, with percieved effects ranging from, ozone layers to fertility to autism, it is important to know how people are making decisions about how to live and where they get their information from. Much effort related to public understanding of science is directed towards research, so these interviews offer an opportunity to see how some of the public understandings of chemicals are formed and held, with respect to products and actions in everyday life.  

Participants might benefit from enjoying airing their views and sharing recollections. 
     

3.5	ADVERSE / UNEXPECTED OUTCOMES
	Please describe what measures you have in place in the event of any unexpected outcomes or adverse effects to participants arising from involvement in the project.

	If a participant should become distressed during the interview,  a break can be taken, or if preferred (or necessary) the interview can be terminated. The principal investigator should not attempt to advise or counsel the participant, if for example they have questions about what to do with waste chemicals or they are worried about exposure to a chemical being responsible for a health effect, but direct them to other sources of support. Due to the wide ranging nature of potential concerns, the Citizens Advice Bureau could help with consumer questions, specialist support groups experienced in discussing chemical sensitivity (Action Against Allergy) or single issue helplines for developmental disorders such as autism (a condition some people hold household chemicals suspect) or environmental services.

Care will be taken during the interview set up and construction of the participant's information sheet and consent form to avoid raising false hopes of "starring" a participant in any resulting outcomes, so that they are not disappointed or offended about how the content of their interview is used. 



3.6	DEBRIEFING, SUPPORT AND/OR FEEDBACK TO PARTICIPANTS (as appropriate)
	What, if any, debriefing, support or feedback will participants receive following the study and when?  Participants may need to talk about the experience of being involved in the study or about issues it has raised for them. Depending on risks to participants you may need to consider having additional support for participants during/after the study (e.g., external counseling). Further information on the aims of the research, their own performance and/or the results of the study may also be appropriate.

At the end of the interview, the interviewee will be thanked for their participation and reassured that as an oral history project looking at everyday experiences, all their memories and views are valuable. The consent form will be reappraised in light of the interview content, and the interviewee can decide how they would like to be referred to in the research (i.e. by their own name, or a pseudonym). They will be able to ask the principal investigator any questions, and they will also be reminded that they have the contact details of the principal investigator and her departmental supervisors on their participant information sheet if any further questions or comments or complaints arise at a later date. 

3.7	MONITORING
	Please explain how the conduct of the study will be monitored, for example via your Associate Dean for Research and Knowledge Transfer or supervisory team, (especially where several people are involved in recruiting or interviewing, administering procedures) to ensure that it conforms with the procedures set out in this application, the University’s Code of Practice and any guidelines published by their professional association. 
	
	The research will be monitored by the supervisory team according to University Code of Practice for monitoring of research degree students.








	
	