Poisonings
And their role in understanding public availability of chemicals

I have approached poisoning as though there are two distinct kinds: accidental and deliberate. Within my category of deliberate, are more separations: administering poison to someone else, and to poison oneself. Tragic accidents, especially those involving children, are especially newsworthy, as are intriguing stories of murder. Self poisoning is of less concern to national newspapers, unless the person is of interest or the method is unusual. However, if a campaign or a crusade against a particular chemical is embarked upon, every incidence matters as I will demonstrate with paraquat and the Daily Mail. 

Kessel [ref] writing in the 1960s points to an epidemic of self poisoning that doctors in Edinburgh hospitals were facing. The majority of these cases he had decided, were a signal of distress. What riled Kessel, was that the poisons of choice were those prescribed by doctors. The very low prevalance of hospital admission from non-drug poisons, suggests that poisoning with household chemicals (other than domestic gas) was not at a significant level, at least during the period studied. Household chemicals  could be imagined to be available in more domestic settings than barbituates prescribed, yet they were rarely used. Those that found themselves as part of Kessel's study  were those who had been seen by a general doctor or admitted directly to hospital then referred to his observation unit. It could be argued that there were others who were poisoned by household chemicals but did not come through these channels so were not counted in this way. I would counter that "to poison" means an incident that results in a reason to go to a doctor or be taken to hospital. Therefore I am satisfied with this method for my purposes.

Certain household chemicals were known to be poisonous, the controls on carbolic acid and cresol [Whyte?], the demand for certain types of packaging such as fluted sides or labelling signaled this.  However, these methods tended to be particularly painful to carry out, and the increasing availability of sleeping pills and their ilk, the prescription of which was perhaps seen as a licence to use them in this way [Kessel], opened up an avenue for (ab)use. As the director of unnamed chemical company wearily explained in his television address, "somone somewhere will misuse a chemical" [ref ]. 

What role does the media play in perpetuating the misuse of chemicals, perhaps even initiating it? There is an issue of copycat behaviour [Oxford thesis? local paper]. In the case of sabotage, such as spiking food products, the perpetrater seeks media attention which is why there was a media blackout on the Safeway case. I wonder if people tried solvent abuse because of stories reported, which were essentially lists of chemicals that people used which by extension meant that they were tried and tested. Using a phrase like "acted like a couple of gins" in the somewhat salacious reporting of a murder case which incorporated a sexual affair where carbon tetrachloride was regularly used, could appeal to  new recreational users, or indeed, sexual abusers. 

In order to be effective at the task that they were intended for, whether this is destroying weeds, germs or stains, there must be an element of destructive strength to the chemical or product. Some users might extrapolate the ability to damage one type of target, making it applicable to others. The wife who poisoned her husband with small repeated doses of sodium chlorate weedkiller expressed this expectation: that it killed weeds, so would do the same to her husband. What is a weed - it is an unwanted plant. What had her husband become - unwanted. There is a logic to it, even if the precise action of the destruction is not explicitly known. The introduction of "safer" meaning weaker and potentially less effective products might reduce the risks to users from poisoning, but the risk of infection from incompletely cleaning or having a sense of false security in a products effectiveness is increased [Whyte]. 

Why then, if household and garden chemicals played only a relatively small part in accidental and deliberate poisoning, when compared to prescription and over the counter drugs, did newspapers and questioning in the house of commons suggest such indignation at their availability?  Perhaps using these parameters to research the question distorts the answers that can be found. Perhaps newspapers and parliamentary questions can only ever deal with minority issues, the vocal minority who campaign and write, but who perhaps then have more of an influence in everyday life than those who don't feel the need or don't have the time. Stories that are out of the ordinary are what people want to read, listen to or watch, they live the everyday and don't need more of it. 

Raising awareness of the potential for harm, and the potential for misuse, seems to be the principle aim of the newspapers. Few of the stories suggested actions for users to take that would reduce the likelihood of accidents happening, such as explicitly declaring that to store household chemicals in unmarked containers is unsafe.  The focus was on bans, stricter retailing, improving labelling, finding antidotes or making a safer formulation, all things that are the responsibility of government, retailers or chemical companies, not the user. The need to appear sensitive to the family of the injured or deceased, overrides the kind of practical advice that other readers could have followed to remain safe.  IT was rare to find an expression of "when will people learn" that an exasperated judge was reported to have said after ruling on a sad case of a father bringing home paraquat in an unmarked bottle. Children accessing chemicals was  intimately associated with mischief, including breaking into sheds or council vehicles. The Daily Mail's investigation into the "killers in your home" did look at technological solutions, such as lockable cabinets with sloping tops to prevent accidentally leaving medication in reach. Vigilance and responsibility for own behaviour is not stressed. Did they look at necessaryness - or alternatives? 





