amateur gardening annual \ 1966

adverts for seeds, sets, plants, tools then 

p5 Dron-wal sprayers cover all your spraying problems. Magna-supreme continuous action sprayer. an ALL BRASS continuous action sprayer, easy in action with little fatigue, 8ft plastic hose with ball-valve suction bent extension lance and ajustable nozzle.

‘Master’ Pneumatic sprayer
complete with bend for under-leaf spreaying and spare set of washers. This is the dependable spryaer popular with Nurserymen, Seedsmen and Gardeners for well over 20 years. Made of BRASS with gold protective finish to give a life long service. Easy trigger control with mist-like spray. 
Insist upon Dron-wal gauranteed sprayers, lawn spinklers and hose fittings etc form you local seedsman, ironmonger, store or implement dealer. The Philip B. Waldron Co Tysley Birmingham 11

p7 Ask by name for 99.9 and Abundance fertilisers. 99.9 soluble blood, 99.9 Tonks rose  Abundance Seegro abundance crysanthfeed 99.9 liquid feeds 99.9.naturally the best


p74 full page graphic of man in cabled knitted-vest, shirt and tie testing a modern garden sprayer. 
p75 1st sentence refs Silent Spring. 2nd sent. mentions RC’s “tendancy to blurr distinction between fact and inference” where it suits her argument, then no disagreement on main argument. If insecticides and other chems must be used in the gdn they should be used to give effective contirol against pest coneernd and hav eminimum effect of other insects animal and plants. 

**approx 30 diff insecticides availat o amateur. 220 formulations each designed and sold for specific purposes under a variety of trade names .** 
Characteristics eg length of active life. 

p103 and 105 (not 104, just unrelated ads) up to date weed control - esp during postwar ears an interest has developed in the use of total and selective weekillers, ommercial growers, incrasing use in public parks and private gardesn 

weedkillers chronology of fashions for - copper sulphate followed by sulphuric acid and sulphate of iron in the 1920s 
tar oil for killing moss
sulphate of iron etc supersedby by more selective and efficient materials. The interest of amateur in maintaining a weed free lawn = ready market for selective materials and control of broadleaved weeds.   Article ends on “Modern herbicides are a new tool, bringing fresh problems but undoubtely a tool with a future.”

Feeds (often non specified), soil sweetening, fertilising taken in the stride, chemicals and manure suggested on equal footing (though usually chem then manure is as good type statement)

Most articles are garden design and planstman orientated, smaller selection of tool review and small selection of chemical type issue e.g pests and disesase, fertiliser

36 articles 2 are chem focused

1 article out of 38

1 out of 30 (sprayer not directly chem but used for)

1 or 2 out of 32

1970 **Chemicals - where do we stand?** p79-83 

me
Gardening chemicals may come with their own delivery technologys e.g. sprayers and spreaders, not to protect the user but to ensure appropriate/effective application and


