Amateur Gardening pocket guide
a
p25 sulphate of ammonia  or Nitro-chalk to hasten decay of dug over grassland (or a dressing of well rotted dung) 

p34 top dressing to feed plant conc but soluble fert of manure, sulph amm, nitrate of sod, dried blood, superphosphate of lime, sulphate of potash
p34 Plant foods - req diff chems. Wrong use of iron, manganese boron and others could cause damage - seek expert advice [from whom? how?] Explains need for balance due to interactions berween chem. Chems should be mixed in correct proportions. By law N P  Potash content of commercial ferts be given as %
chem tmts for compost heap - nitrochalk, sulph amm or a special [unnamed] proprietry product as rotting agent if much hard mtter

p36 indore process controlled method - mix animal and veg refuses in definite poropritions with dung and urine. Excessive acidiy is counteracted with Calcuim carbonate (chalk) or potassium carbonate. Occasionally slaked lime is employed. No other chemicals are used but wood ash mixed in if available. 
		Nothing is said of testing to gauge acid/alk.
		
p40 instructions given to dry blood - as fresh blood is messy and unpleasant to handle. add 1lb of slaked lime to each gallon, pour into a shallow box, cover with a thin layer of lime and allow to dy. 

p40 calcuym cyanamide -dusty, difficult to apply evenly, caustic effect on roots nd leaves, kept ot of direct touch. Weedkiller and feriliser combined. also rotting agent in compost heap.

p41 - flue dues and coal ashes deskried as no value as fertiliser. sharp boilers ashes to lighten clay soils, flue dust can be bought. 

gauno striclty belongs to sea birds on coast of Peru and other rainless districts but now loosly applied to many compound chemi fert.

fish guano - dried refuse from factories processing fish. use according to mfcrs instructions. 

hoof and horn - steady acting
Kainit crude form of potash, muraiate of potash is combined iwth common salt and other chemicals. [is Kainit a trade name?]

p42 lime - loosley applied in gardens to several other compounds of calcium. Soil sweeteners to liberate other chemicals and improve texture. All forms of lime, inc chalk, are identical except that some acct more rapidly and others have better moisture holding qualities. 
p43 gives method of testing soil for lime. Tumbler [not beaker] dilute hydrochloric acid. If ther eis much effervescence, there is free lime present. Rough and ready method. Free lime is not essential to health of  plants/  soil Available lime is a better gauged through a pH reading. 

pure meat refuse = mainly nitrogenous, but meat meal contains ground bones to increase phosphatic content. 
 
 101 things you should know
 These  questions and answers are essentially the same content as is presented in the later pocket guide but in the form of a question and answer, divided up into pests and diseases, fertilisers and manures etc much the same as the later books. 
