GardeningAllotment and Garden Council  Originally titled The Domestic Food Producer’s Council, the AGC included representatives from the Women’s Institute, the Allotment’s Society, the Royal Horticultural Society, Ministry of Food, the Board of Education, Society of Friend’s Allotments, Institute of Parks, National Council of Social Service, Townswomen’s Guilds, Horticultural Education Associations, County Council Associations, Urban District Council Association and more. Most of the practical work issuing guidance and information, funding, fielding questions and providing information was devolved to a small Finance and General Purposes Committee, which met 8e10 times a year (see TNA MAF 43/43, 1941e1949). Instead of relying on committees of government or horticultural experts, people mostly relied firstly on notes in newspapers, other gardeners and radio (cited by 70% of respondents), the most popular show being Mr Middleton’s In your garden.55 Middleton, one of four sons of a farm bailiff, was a gardener and horticulturalist and was selected by producer John Green to present the BBC’s first gardening pro- gramme. Gardeners’ World – BBC, 1968 came from Oxford Botanical GardensPercy Thrower -  1956 BBC Gardening Club, then Gardeners’ World 1969 – 1976, Blue Peter 1974 – 1987  The BBC summarily dropped Thrower when in 1975 he agreed to a contract with Plant Protection, a subsidiary of ICI, for a series of commercials.  In 1967 he’d been involved with the first garden centre, Syon Park, backed by Plant Protection who had leased land from Duke of Northumberland.Geoff Hamilton – 1970 Gardening Diary Anglia TV, 1979 – 1996 host of Gardeners’ WorldBob Flowerdew Gay Search Gardeners' World Through The YearsSonya rose “Which People’s War?”Charles Windsor (Prince Charles)  Highgrove : portrait of an estateCopper sulphateWashing sodaBordeaux mixtureFernherst, Verdley Estate SurreyICI Plant Protection Ltd bought the estate in 1945 as a technical research centre and for demonstrating commercial horticulture. Fernhurst Research Station rapidly became a national centre of fruit growing expertise, and Fernhurst villagers enjoyed the orchard and glasshouse produce in ‘pick-your-own’ sales. From 1959 to 1975 it was ICI’s headquartersJuly 1946 Ten boys visited Plant Protection at Verdley and watched various agricultural demonstrations. (School Log Book)Sept 1948 In a friendly match, Plant Protection beat Fernhurst Reserves by 7-2, although the report added that the game was not as one-sided as the score might suggest. (Haslemere Herald)Young Farmers Clubs/ AssociationsOctober 1950 The Latvian community, which is now occupying the former military camp (where Nicholsons now stands) held a Lutheran service in St Margaret’s Church. (Haslemere Herald)Oct 1950 Miss Edith Williams of Plant Protection, Miss Pat Thompson of Upperfold Farm and Miss Edith Hanwell of Cotchet Farm, all members of the Women’s Land Army, took part in the farewell parade before HM the Queen at Buckingham Palace. (Haslemere Herald)May 1955 Phyllis Riddle, a pretty 17 year old who works at Plant Protection, was proclaimed May Queen. She was voted for by more than one hundred children and an appreciably greater number of adults than in previous years. The Revels were held on the Recreation Ground for the first time. Twenty former May Queens attended the May Queens’ Tea, including Mrs Sarah Woodhams, 89, who had been May Queen in 1881.June 1956 At the second Plant Protection international conference delegates saw the presentation on mini-tvs on their desks rather than on a single large screen. (Haslemere Herald)April 1967 Plant Protection Ltd, a subsidiary of ICI, was given the Queen’s Award to Industry for expansion of sales to overseas markets. (Haslemere Herald)June 1977 A special assembly was held at school when all the children were presented with mugs celebrating the Silver Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II, donated by ICI. The presentation was made by Mrs Jenny Mitchell, whose husband John was director of Overseas Marketing at ICI. (School Log)June 1980 Some 6,000 attended the ICI Plant Protection Open Day at Verdley and made good use of the tractor and trailer service that ferried visitors around the 450 acre site to see the displays and demonstrations.Plantector -  site mag?http://www.fernhurstsociety.org.uk/oralhistory/oralhistory.html particular emphasis on the period 1920-1980http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=1964-12-22a.1054.0 Introduction of Farm and Garden Chemicals Act 1964