Williams, Stephen
Outdoor Recreation and the Urban Environment

coming at this from a planning spaces angle? 

good discussion on what leisure and recreation are:
recreation as sub-area of leisure
Patmore '83 - leisure - 3 ways of looking at it:
	in terms of time, period of day after routine committments
	attitude - reflection of person's perception of at leisure
	activity - this is where recreation is most clear. 
			Recreation - relaxing, energetic, recuperative, social cultural intellectual or creative developments
			
			what consitutes recreational activity varies between people-  for some people a recreational activity is a chore - gardening is one of these
			
p5 General Houshold Survey - starting point for many analyses of lleisure time - lists popular recreations - provides only part of a picture.   Kay mentions that in unprompted interviews, people sometimes don't spontaneously mention some of the activities they do most, are routine, because they aren't on the list, or are so commonplace (p12, 13)

p8 increased mobility - facilitated extension of recreation havits
conversely, leisure centred within and around the home has taken on greater significance. 

BBC 1978 study
Glyptis an dChambers 1982
show that more than half of all liesure time is spent at home. 

growth of in-home entertainment, eg market for TV sets, hi-fis


Gershuny and Jones 1987 - changing patterns in the use of time
time redistributed. 
decline in working hours but also decline in time alloted to personal care and domestic chores [mentions machines, but not chemicals]. Time freed up has been switched to childcare and leisure. 

p36

home centredness  - convenience, privacy and relative security. 
For some though, not the consequence of choice - trap of poverty or unemployment. 
p37
gardening as a routine (not special), programmed leisure. 

p75
'Gardens are mirrors of ourselves ... by making gardens, using or admiring them, and dreaming of them, we create our own idealised order of nature and culture.' Francis and Hester 1990 (2). all gardens have a significance that extends beyond formal qualities and patterns of use. 

gardens as medium for the expression of ideas. 
expressing religious belief, political or monarchial powers

productive purposes - aesthetic zones, extensions of indoor living space

gardening - creative art rewards and failures, sense of achievement and enchanced self esteem that comes with sucessful management of a garden, as are simpler pleasure 0 enjoying the visual qality of plants, poss the wildlife attracted. 

expression focultural values and beliefts - imposing an order - surrogate expresson of commons cultural values. 

p77
Kellet argues that the private garden is English - in Europe, even Scotland, tradition of apartment or tenemant living has made garden plot attached to single dwelligns less commonplace. 

p80
gardening - rational recreation Victorian paternalists tried to encourage amongst the working popn - self reliance, management of resources, self improvement
p82
invasion of domestic environment by central heating, washing machines, tumble dryers and deepfreezes diminished or eradicated the need to allocate garden space for routine funcitons as fuel sotrage, drying of laundry and veg production. 

allotments - not analagous to private gardens. Co-operative, organised, controled, ownership in presence of reciprocal arrangements eg group purchases of materials, sharing of ritualsa dn commonatilt of interst. Private garden = few of these attributes. Significant number 62% Kay's 88 study of stoke on Trent had a private domestic gardne. 

p97
conventionally allotments - working class facilities
urban gentrification - changing perspectives on environmentalism, attraction of organic foods, lifestyles that value exercise and health related fitness = movement into allotment holding by professional and middle class groups. (Crouch 1989 a)
Crouch and Ward - post war years - diversity of doay's alltoment holders. 
haringay - Crocucn and WArd book - The Allotment: landscape and clture 1988- new arrivals, young professionals seeking places of character, influence by ecological ideas. 


BBC The People's Activies and USe of Time 1978
Gershuny and Jones - The Changing Work / Leisure Balance in Britain 1961 - 1984 in Horne, Jary and Tominson  (eds) 9-50. Sport Leisure and Social Relations. 1987

Crouch 1989 a- the allotment, landscape and Locality Area V21, no3 261-267




