The chemistry of the Garden
Cousins
Macmillan's primers

borrowed from Peter
first published 18..
revised 1922, this print from 1943

author's preface
pxiv
for amateurs and cottagers to whom expense is a consideration the chapters on manuring an date spraying of plants should prove of service. Many gardeners are paying an exorbitant premium for the supposed merits of other people's brains and are charged four or five times as much for manures and garden (xv) remedies as the identical materials cost in the ordinary market.
... greatly reduce his expenditure on those garden requisites at any rate to obtain three times as much material for his money. 


authors preface to revised edition 1915
(xvii) notes on price increases - war
instructions for paranaph - paraffin naphthalene emulsion - previously under patent but freely available to (xviii) the people of Kent and Surrey, but now elapsed. Lime sulphur wash another useful addition. 

preface to second revised edition 1920
indicates high demand from gardeners and need to update according to conditions of war. 

on testing soil
p40
mix 10-20 samples from around garden together then placing a small sample in a tumbler and pouring on it a wine-glassful of muriatic acid. If fizzes and bubbles freely = sufficiency of chalk. Feeble bubbles/ none = dress with lime. 


on spraying
p109
the chemical expert in plant remedies is so inclined to trust in his 'squirt' and to find salvation for all the ills of plant life in modified and repeated applications of his various washes that he is apt to entirely ignore the fact that a plant able to resist the enemy without assistance or even to escape it entirely is far more profitable than another plant which has had to undergo frequent drenchings and coatings of protective material. 

[emphasis is on correct feeding/manuring, cultivation and management to grow strong, healthy, parasite free plants that will not need constant treating but be able to withstand attack = preventative treatments

however, even the best managed garden will benefit from knowing about when to spray with what. ]

p111
many insects beyond prevention. The more we narrow down garden remedies to a few effective and cheap material of universal application the more hope is there for the extension of sound 
p112
methods of prevention and cure in our gardens and small holdings. 

Sulphur
oldest and most popular remedy for mildews
effect not marked under the most favourable conditions, regarded as a very milked and feeble remedy against surface moulds and mildews. 
misapprehension - commonly stated that the sulphur slowly oxidises producing brimstone fumes or sulphur dioxide and that the latter is the true and active principle on which the value as a remedy depends. 
smell of sulphur is not the smell of burning sulphur but probably the sulphur vaoupr. high temp required
p113
to have any appreciable effect and out of doors sulphur is of little avail later than August or before June.
Practice o f putting sulphur on the hot water pipes in greenhouses and vineries is  a good one, but take care that it does not actually take fire. 
Procure best Flowers of Sulphur dust it finely while leaves are damp with dew. 
Appeaers to have irritating effect on leaf surface, promote greater activity, many practical men regard an occasional dose to hops or roses under glass as an equiv to a brandy and soda. This stimulation if it really exists has been much overestimated and sulphur should only be regarded as the mildest of remedies, not trustworthy for sever attacks. 

sulphur boiled with lime - acquired world wide recognition over last ten years esp in tropical and subtropical countries for dealing with red spider. 
lime sulphur wash - 1lb quicklime and 2 lb flowers of sulphur 1 gallon water - stirred boiled
to use dilute to 5 gallons as winter spray on fruit trees, to 10 gallons for citrus and other trees with resistant foliage under tropical conditions, to 15 gallons for more delicate plants and 25-30 as a summer spray on plants with expanded foliage under Engish conditions. 
the enterprising gardener will doubtless find many directions in which LSW can be used to advantage and will find it useful to keep a stock on hand. Do not bring this liquid into contact with white lead paint. Cleans all syringes and spraying apparatus after us. [creates a large volume, which will apparently keep well in jars bottles or wooden vessels]

p116
Bordeaux mixture
amounts given for 100 gallons or 5 gallons. 
wooden vessel - avoid iron or galvanised vessels in using Bordeaux mixture. 
p117
safety test for bordeaux (safety to foliage)
undecomposed copper sulphate is damaging - test by mixing a little with potassium ferrocyanide solution, observe chocolate colour, add more lime until no brown colour appears

poisonous
not applied to edible fruits within 3 weeks of the time of gathering. Easily removed from tomatoes under glass by carefully wiping each fruit with a damp cloth. 

p118
ready made copper precipitate  - Bordeaux Paste or Borderite
Mond Nickel Co have placed a product Blighty Misture whig gives a copper liquid of the type of Burgand mixture. favourable reports received from  England. If a resistant, ready prepared powder that could safely stand storage and handling under adverse conditions of climate (re. Jamaica, where author is now based)

p125 gardening societies in the villages should purchase 2 or 3 pneumatic pressure machines, there are scores of places where an enterprising man could earn good remuneration as a sprayer if his services were available in small garden when wanted.
buy one with a copper tank - if iron very limited use
pair of sailors oilskin growers are a great com for when spraying potatoes when Bordeaux and rubber gloves are desirable for extensive operations with the winder alkali wash. 

p128
caustic alkali solution (insecticide spray)
10 gallons
weigh  out 2.25 lbs caustic soda (commercial) taking care not to get any on the hands or clothes... dissolve in bucket, dilute to 10gallons, add dissolved 10 oz soft soap. 
choose as still a day as possible for application in order to avoid the blowing of spray on the face. take care not to get the liquid on the hands more than ned, put on a very old suit of clothes and an ancient hat. If a large no trees/bushes need treating 
p129
purchase a pair of rubber cloves. It should be recognised that this wash is strongly caustic and is decidedly injurious to the skin as well as to clothing.
explains that the soft soap encourages wetting/sticking and that it economises on the spray

p131 
biting insects
must be p poisoned as rats mice etc by feeding on the poison rather than being washed by it. 
insect poisons = paris green, london purple and lead arsenate. 
p132
Paris Green - buy it in the form of past, avoiding the loose powder as dangerous. Blundell's is the best make.
always add twice as pouch lime as a precaution against soluble arsenic and the injury it causes to foliage. 
no risk to stock or poultry in orgards where paris green is used as the quantity is so small as to have no effect on large animals. 

p133
london purple waste material from dye works - arsenic. less reliable than paris green. 

purchase pure arsenate of soda from wholesale chemist and three times as much commercial (white acetate of lead, commonly known as sugar of lead. If used alone a supply of cheap agricultural treacle will also be required. 

p135
explains doubtfulness of quassia - aphids desert rather than are killed, avoid extract or soap as buyer has no control or guarantee as to strength or quality

p141
soot - when fresh is useful remedy for slugs and being a general fertiliser is often valuable assistance to garden. dust soil with soot until it is quite black

pepper - waste pepper has been used by market growers as remedy against caterpillars on gooseberries, but hellebore powder generaly better. 

Pyrethrum - well known remmed agains insects, dusted or applied as liquid. 

Carbon bisulphide - eelworm, wire worm. highly inflammable = careful handling. 




