Green and Pleasant Land

RHS 
had to be connected to an existing fellow to get in, so it tended to be well to do people. Though they did have a formal realtions hip with a great number of afiliated societies, local horticultural clubs which paid a small fee and recieved som group benefits, helped to disseminate information form the RHS. It would be amatuer experts, rather than amateur gardeners who might directly join the RHS. RHS was involved in efforts to get people to grow food in gardens in first world war, and EA Bunyard prepared an influential document that would form the basis of the Dig for Victory campaign that was launched as soon as war was declared in September 1939. Bunyard also suggested that the RHS’s monthly journal had a third of the space given over to wartime gardening issues.   

lobbied interwar govt on insecticide descriptions

radios - inexpensive, could get reception most places, tv was turned off (for the duration). Est 34million, though licence fee evasion mran prob hghr
RHS supplied bulletins for the BBC radio from 1924
1934  1945 (death) CH Middleton given own weekly series In the Garden -> In Your Garden 
overtly educational slant, Reith 
no weather forecasts as to avoid helping Germans - had to rely on own reading of the skies, difficult to tell for soil treatments, washing drying etc. 

lack of running water to allotmnts [gardens too - outside tap?]

Ministry of Information intended to continue to insert regualr weekly gardening items in national Sunday papers as well as selected prvinvial papers but would omit the coldest weeks of the year when gareneing operations would be suspecnted. Probably 44 insertions rather than 52 the year before. The technical press such as The Gardeners Chronicle would ge the same info as before, as would women’s magazines and the Radio Times which were targeted in the spring and usmmer months. 

BBC - instructional films and trailers for showing in cinemas

loc 1335-37
sample had compost heaps while about 2/3 understood that they should not spray for potato blight in polluted industrial districts because of the risk of cumulative chemical damage to plants 

loc1629-32
women turned out to be more resistant to propaganda appeasl. MoI inquiry revealed that although a higher proportion of women than men had taken up allotments since the war started, female gardeners were liess inflenced by the publicity. Only 36% send away for Dig for Victory leaflts, as opposed to 44% of men. Read fewer gardening articles in newspapera s well. 

 loc 1562-79
Miss Elizabeth Hess a professional horticulturist recruited to the NFWI as an agricultural oganiser to promote food production among members, talking to WI gathering. established Produce Cuild for keen gardeners and cooks, taught pragmatic double digging  (not triple), how to store vegetables through the winter, how to use derris powder on vegetable pests ‘I got hold of a new handgun duster [used to puff the powder onto plants’  you could see insects dying infront of your eyes. 

loc 1634-37
womens mags - soap and beauty products aimed at women who were growing veg but who did not want their hands to show the effects of rough work. Also carried gardening columns specifcically aimed at women, though often contained as much cooking as gardening info. 

loc 1638-40
June 1944 the manager of the shop run by the Dewsbury Allotments ASsociation reported that women were doing more gardening than men that year with the result that the demand for chemical manures had fallen off, though it is hard to see exactly wehere the connection laay. 

loc2025-34
increasing scarcity of farmyard manures, composting of garden and kitchen waste was vigorously promoted. Dinned into them by posters, wireless talks and cinema films, even a Dig for Victory elaflet. [could this have not affected the amount of chem manures sold in Dewsbury?]

loc 2044-66
FC King and Howard  - wariness of chemical fertilisers, considered that they often promoted the wrong kind of growth and also put nothing of valie in the way of humus into the soil. 
“On the whole, gardening commentators thought of organicmanures more as soil imporvers than as cheical feeders and were keen on the use of cheical fertilisers for the latter purpose, was to prove difficult since conentional portash fertilisers such as sulphate of potash were almost all imported from France, Germany and Poland - supplies dried up rapidly after war broke out. Potash necessary for promoting god fruiting and flowering esp for fruit type veg liek tomatoes - a manjor headach= shortage. 
Allotmenteers were allowed to buy max 3.5lb of muriate of potash (potassium chloride) per year, scarecly sufficnet. the chloride ion made this feriliser toxic to some plants, inc potatoes and some fruit. Nirtogenous ferts such as nitrate of soda were easier to come by andseed merchants liek Suttons sold a range of such well known pre war fertilisers as wellas bizarre sounding subsitutes including Ichthemic Gauno, Polutmure, Garotta (ulparte of ammonia and used to accelate eomposition in compost heaps). Even these chemical fertilisers were in such liited supply that the cutomer had to promise faithfully to use themo nly in the veg garden [where else would they have used them? for flowers?]

loc 2068-74
so concerned were the authorities... and so dubious were they that the amatuer gardener’s scientific knowledge of soil nutirents that they launched in a blaze of publicity in 1942 a standard compound granular fert called National Grwomore. 7:7:7 NPK, popular because of general applicability and ease of use, still sells well today. Took the guess work out of feeding their plots, provided that the soil was already reasonably fertile. 

loc 2074-78
great emphasis on correct pH, not straightforward. Had to be done with hydrochloric acid (spritis of salt) bought from the chemist. Alternatively if the soil tasted sweet it was alkaline, if sour it was acid. Most porbably asked their neighbour whether they suffered from clubroot and acted accordingly. 

sodium chlorate killed everything it touched, highly flammable, less effective onalkaline soils than acid ones. Never a DfV pamphlet on weeds and weeding, despite the insistence that weeds should not take nutriments needed by cops. Dearth of suitable weedkillers. 

second growmre leaflet = pests and diseases - message if you want to be sucessful, you need o use chem pesticides

rember much work done since on pest/virus restistant strains to reduce need for chem app

calomel, mercuric chloride - syphilis
deadly poison, use gloves - Gardeners Chronicl - unusual, PPE was rarely mentioned

gardening part of the curriculum in 1940 replacing games on one afternoon a week. Almost always the boys who tended the school crops. 

loc 1937-39
haricot beans were often a failure in gardens unless it was recognised that they needed a lot of sun, space and penty of sulphate of ammonia and phosphates. 

loc2217-22
Bordeaux solutions - made up in bucket and tested by dipping a knife blade in the solution - if the blade darkened in colour, more quicklime or washing soda solution was needed. 

loc 2274-82
Middleton’s In Your Garden - moved from Friday evening to Sunday afternoon - reader’s poll. Average audience in late 1940 of 2950000, more han the Daily Serive r the Wednesday Symphony Concert but less than the Kitchen Front. Regarded highly enough for the gardening talks to be reproduced in print form in the weekly periodical The Listener.  paid 12 guineas a programme and 5 for the reproduction of the script. 
Audience ratings did fall after war broke out but assumed that this was more to do with war conditions that disenchantment, deceline possibly because gardening was no longer a hobby and the soporific appeal had diminshed. Middleton wrote a weekly column for the Daily Express on Saturday and was horticulural consultant to Boots the Chemist. Roy Hay covered Middledton’s summer break, as did Fred Streeeter and took over when he died of a heart attack.




