Marion Cran
Garden writer

Garden Register - a notebook for gardeners 1925
section on manures

As we bend in our gardens stirring and mixing, blending and renewing the various ingredients in the crucible of earth, unconscious chemists, I sometimes wonder if there is ever a fixed formula for those who work with Nature.... What a lot there is to learn of the preferences of our plants in sita alone, as well as soil. Those that like sun those that like shade; those that want boggy ground; and those that like bare rock. But most bewildering of all is their varied palates for the manures!
(The story of my ruin)

Notes suggested
	On Manures
Kind, quantity, where put, date, comments

	Garden Books to get
Name, recommended by, special subject, published by, price

	Heard on the Wireless
Spoken by, date, matter


*********************************

Gardens of Character
Marion Cray FRSA 
Herbert Jenkins 1939

I wouldl like to learn from her [Mrs Howard Pease] those Rudolf Steiner methods in body and soul. 
Ignorant people call them occult fantastic or by other names inadequately lable what is beyond their spiritual grasp.
The pupils of that teaching peserve an element of mystery about their processes. They are successful and they depend for their success upon the integrity and intelligence that go to these biological dynamic methods; in this naughty world it is all too certain that these would soon be exploited, commercialised and vulgarised beyond use or repalir; the pure distillation would become snthetic; too well one knows how real is usch peril. To presere the purity and health-giving nature of their food-products they are grown in the Rudolf Steiner gardens by methods which exclude all use of artificial chemical fertilisers and sprays in the tmt of either soil or plant at any stage of cultivation. The deep-rooted instinct of a woman who is both a mother and a midwife makes me accept without question the rightness of this view. 
I have long believed that the chemical powers put upon the land only timulate and do not feed it. Like feeding a baby on champagne. I have revolted at the sight of gardens blue with Bordeaux mixture and men /p221/ in gas masks sparying poisonous powders and washes on orchards and fields. The acidity in the soil caused by chemical fertilisers has to be corrected by enormous doses of lime. 
Most popular garden mags and papera who advertise these nostrums will not publish articles decrying them. After all, they say, our revenue comes from advertisesr not from readers. The RS method strikes at the huge vested interest of chemical manures and fertilisers; it goes to the root of plant disease and abolishes the chemical panaceas by working for humus content, the real problem o f plant health is fertility of the soil. Grown by thse methods plants became more resistnat to disease and late forsts. 
Today in our grossness we do not respond to the aura of plants as te Greeks did. When they approached henbane or colchicum or poisonous herbs they paled, recogniseing the dangerous radiation for they knew what the modern world of press the button flat dwellers have forgotten, do not even guess or believe when they are told - that plants are abridge between man and the spiritual worls. 
I can hear the gentle earneset voice of Mrs Pease as we walked about her bee garden, vegetable garden and compost heaps. Scraps remain with me - “We must have a change of heart before we can understand the truth of what flows between eather and the stars.”
“Under the microscope we do not possess the plant.”
“Compost and manure heaps are treated with the Steiner preparations.”
“Equisetum arvense is 98 per cent silica. We use it a great deal. Dandilion has a calcium efficiency; other plants have other properties.”
/222/
“The vegetable plots are treated in alternate years with treated compost or manure adn are cropped accordingly. Colour and texture of soil improve rapidly”
spiritual blah blah
Steiner’s teaching on Agriculture were first known in Germany in 1924. Today some thousands of farms and garden have successfully adopted these methods in many parts of the owrld, inlcuding GB ad most Englis speaking countires. Mrs HP speaks of thinkgs I can understand; in her company I do not remember that I suffer from obsimity. 
With her I can learn. 


Garden Wisdom 
Marion Cran (published after her death, an cassortment of her previous work)
1947

p58 
A lesson to learn 
...thorough tilling of the soil is the most important and the best wasy of feeding plants; curiosly enough for all its simplicity , that is a very hard lesson to learn, especially, I notice to women. There is in the heart of a real woman gardener always the mother - and moths have a deeply rooted instinct to feed things; and above all to feed anything that is helpless and at their mercy. So they like pletny of manure, of basic slag and bone meal, to pile upon the platter of their earth, when most of the time they would be saving their pockets and feeding their flowers more healthily and plentifuly if they were constantly stirring, turning, and deeply cultivating the soil.
That is not to say te garden has no use fo rth pleasing menu of manures and of fertilisers; all plants have a good deep, lusty passion for their right fare ad well tilled earth will assimilate it readily and render it back to the eye of the giver in beautiful bloom and foliage. 
One has to learn the properities of these conidments in order to offer them intellignetly , and also, of course, the individual preference of the flowers and fruit we wish to grow. The artificial , or chemical, or inorganic manure are mostly called “fertilisers” nowadays, ad the farmyard or green crops are generally called “manure”. In my young days there was a word for manure forbidden to our vocabulary, the simple and expressive neame of dung. I wonder how my lily-fingered lady would have behaved if I had said “Dung!”... left the “fat fascals” unfinished, perhaps, and my low company for ever. 
From *I know a Garden*


p133 (article, Blossom Time starts p132)
... The sprays which we apply to the trees are poisonous to insect life since thy are used for the purpose of killing the unwelcome insect pests. And therefore a little reflection will prove how harmful it must necessarily become to use insecticides at thei time. Sprays applied for the destruction of pests of fruit trees at time when these other essential insects visit the trees will naturally slaughter friends and foes alike; to kill the visiting pollen bearers is to invite, therefore, a severe lossin our our crops of fruit.
From *The story of my Ruin*

