Pursuit of Paradise
Jane Brown

p266
BBC 2  - Percy Thrower Gardener's World , the producers found a retired Boots research chemist named Arthur Billitt, making a garden in Worcestershire at Clack's Farm. 
Through the 1970s the weekly adventures of Clack's Farm featured in the nation's sitting rooms. 

Bill Duncalf then Barrie Edgar (producers) and presenters Thrower and Peter Seabrook. 

every specimen was stage ready and what was not did not appear on camera that week. For the very best of reason - that tv was entertainment and that the founding wartime tradition had been to promote the biggest, most perfect veg and fruit, the modern view of stage set gardens and glossy unreal perfection was born. Emphasis on making best use of ferts and chems, must have been related to connection to Boots who at Lenton Research station were examining plant nutrient and trace elements. The worst side of old head gardeners traditions : the contrivance and distortion of the show table had emerged as the dominant image of gardening excellence. 

p267 MO- after war revealed that 80% Britons wanted a house and garden. In reality few proved to be active gardeners, garden more a symbol of space and the right to do what one liked with it. 

post war gardeners wanted low maintenance gardens of year round beauty. 

Studio Annual, co edited by Roy Hay who was on the staff of the Gardeners' Chronicle and a broadcaster. 
1952 architect Brenda Colvin - working in the garden is in itself a relaxation to many of us, but the ideal is to have as little essential work as possible. 
p268
work was out of fashion


p191
Science Lends a Hand
chapter envisaged as a search for silent spring and indictment of the use of herbicides and pesticides. gardeners implicated by association in creating a silent spring.  A difficult story to find. 

1939 book by Sir Frederick Keeble. Science Lends a hand in the garden falsely cheerful, like so many eminent scientist he treats us like children. 

p192 practices of people in benign cool temperate climate, which breeds no truly terrible pests. the natural interact not people in garden and landscape. 
p193 most ills can be cured by good methods and management. 
early C19 -weeds came from bad soil conditions and bad management .
p194 weeds were susceptible to good drainage, adding nutrients and handwork. 
chain of cause and effect long understood. Always ambiguity and different viewpoints. Complete Vermin Killer popular in C18 towns - mix of arsenic and honey for ants should be kept away from children in a box, with holes pierced in it that were too small for bees. It had remedies to kill bees too, but only when they were unwanted. 

p194  background to the development of chems (hard to find and not in gardening books) Romans using sulphur, Paris green. Bordeaux mix, originally used to prevent people steal in grapes form roadside vineyards. 
p195biological control not new
After WWI malaria most monstrous enemy. endemic. 
war - synthetic mfc of nitrogen, privatised by ICI. Julian Philips )?_ inspiration for modern nitrogen industry was Sir William Crooke's address to the BA in 1896 when he warned starvation was inevitable. amount of land etc. 

p196
Many eminent scientists were sceptical and fearful of DDT, dieldrin and aldrin but MinAg refused controls or to provide protective clothing or adequate info incase it hampered the task of farmer and gardener in feeding the nation. 

the 1943 Farm Journal and Farmers Wife, noted the arrival of a new work 'pesticide' (prev pestology) a

Science lends a hand in the garden - look, how clever we are, lulling into smiling acquiescence. 

p197
RHS housed new chemist, mycologist and entomologist in Laboratory. trials of sundries relating to pests and disease started in 1913 at request o society's fellows. Trials of knapsack sprayers started, but impractical. 
Keeble seconded to Min Ag Food Production 1917, resigned from RHS at end of war. 

another dimension of well intentioned but disastrous role as friendly gardener uncle Prof Geoffory Blackman, lecture in Ecology Imperial College Lonon from 1935 -45
p198
Blackman worked on development of selective weedkillers. He was to regret that it was his work that destroyed poppies in cornfields and in post aware road schemes he insisted they should be part of the mixture for verges. 
He advised on the aftermath of the military use of defoliants. 

garden is green private space of home in which any level of skill is acceptable. 
compared to television in living room - technological invader source of enlightenment, but worldiness also a threat to the secutires of home. 
Pesticides in garden = sledgehammer for a walnut. close to children and pets, domestic sewerage so therefore the water supply
p200 and the feeding ground of urban birds, insects and wild animals 
1946 - Adam the Gardener, strip cartoon Sunday Express
arsenical Paris green to kill millipedes in soil. Evidence that expectation of chemical aids in the garden was endemic. Post war gardeners, worn out, needed to grow food in a dismally rationed society, demanded and deserved the helpful chemicals developed for ag and wartime necessity. 

popular 1950s handbook Penguin - roses advocated dusting and spraying with DDT. 

gardens were too small to enter into the minds of conservationists worried about grass verges and ag fields. 
RC addresses gardening in chapter 11
p201
desires of gardeners for success at all costs ensured there would be alternatives to banned DDT . 
Chem mfcr saw selves a gardens friends. and cultivation of low maintenance e fashion and philosophy implied that only fools labour in their gardens, allied to the desirability of leisure as well as an iridescently green striped lawn. 

Pesticides Boon or Bane by former ICI man MB Green in 1976
unrestrained illustration of horrible scabbings, swelling and eruptions of diseased humans animals and plants. little one could object to after hearing how pesticides had reduced us from similar fate. 

should chemicals with a killing power of epidemic proportions that can defoliate whole jungles even in their toxicity deducted forms that are supposed to make them unskilled-user-friendly be in our gardens at all. This question has been overlooked and now seems impossible that it will be answered. 

p202
chem industry reorganised and repacked since the 1980s, names shorn of any past by takeovers and regroupings. none has to answer for ht nasty old connections any more. 
British AgroChemicals Association useful leaflet on good practice and safe procedures. If safety procedures are this complex and 27 pages worth does not get on every packet, should we be playing with them in our gardens? 

withdrawal of Roseclear - regretful tone towards the blackening of the reputation of the leading product on which the pack labels have always warned of such dangers when the liquid was undiluted some 40 million applications of rose clear have shown a max of 4 reports of such problems since 1982 is the mfcrs rather hurt statement. One is led to be concerned than ever, for where is the sense of a ban on such flimsy evidence? Are the 4 reports the tip of an iceberg? How can the simple gardener believe anyone? 

p167
John Brookes - Room Outside
had worked with Sylvia Crowe and Brenda Colvin at their Gloucester Place office
Room outside had obvious debt to Sylvia, but stripped down jazzed up and aimed at people in a hurry. 

In Garden Design Sylvia Crowe noted allotments out of favour in the 50s as neglected and untidy, undoubtedly digging fatigue. Consumerist affluence sand pop culture, wanted nothing to do with symbols of poverty, charity and wartime needs. 

p168
Chris Baines message is the small garden is a first lesson in global housekeeping, it leads out to community gardens ad woodlands to the discovery that the most editing wild creatures and plants live in the suburban and urban space with us. 
BBC2 film Bluetits and Bumblebees first shown in 1984, followed by how to make a wildlife garden book  bestseller. back garden wildlife sanctuary - message of overuse of pesticides bad for humans as it was for fires. 

