Uglow
Little History of British Gardening

p256
Tom Jerrold's Our War Time Kitchen of 1917 is simply his standard work The Kitchen Garden reissued with hardly a comma altered. 
thousands saw grwoging veg, esp potatoes as own small defiant answer

1917 Women's Land Army

Peace and grief made gardens more precious. The gaze turned inward away form the world. Badly wounded at Somme, at peace in his garden.

257
1920s through depression of 30s garden was pleasure, escape. Terrace for deck chairs.

Huge new class of garden owners. Between wars 4 million _ house built, many used land more generously. 
12 house to an acre (guideline report 1918)
some new houses had gardens of 250-300 feet long
listened to radio, novelist Marion Cran broadcast 1st gardening programees in 1923
clearly speaking to a new audience. 1934 Middleton took over and In your Garden was required listening

p258
New gardeners took task v seriously. 
Gardeners Companion of 1938 includes weekend calendar. 
Everything is a potential foe
this household book turns out to be stuffed with poison. 
white lead paint on wounds in trees
set traps or use deterrents such as Sanitas powder or permanganate of potash crystals for slugs. spray fruit with tar oil 
p259
alarming questions - hedgerows are great sources of infestation and infection - what about yours

p261
advice on plants to screen air raid shelf, importance of cheerfulness and colour. 

p265
CE Lucas Phillips - ex army, Brigadier. 
The Small Garden 1952
classic of the first years of peace, detailed, affable, forthright and sensible. Written for gardeners who might have an acre but prob a suburban garden of less than half that size. Sold hundreds of thousands of copies over 50 years. Book spoke to the masses. 

p266
not until the 1950s and exuberant gardens of Festival of Britain with bold-shaped plants that any modern movement took place in britain. 
Sylvia Crowe - Garden Design - sternly elegant

p271
1960s new housing estates American style - grassy frontage, double garages. 
these modern gardens were architectural raher than ornamental, paving and cobbles, pools with sculpture. 
concrete was the new garden feature
the way that the home was taking over the garden could be measured by the suchess of John Brooke's Room Outside in 1969 
functionalist - garden an important place of escape from a hectic world but 'fundamentally a place for use by people. Not a static picture created by plants.'

p273 Bookes ideas caught on slowly. if the garden was a room then a key need was privacy, instead of openness pebbles and pools the old panelled fences grew higher an the screens of leylandii began to rise. 

p276
Cumberland 1957  - accident at Calder Hall, gardeners were told to burn produce for fear it had been contaminated by fallout. Rejected cabbages and lettuce had been rained on, concept of fallow made sense but who could believe that carrots of beetroot safely tucked beneath the soil were not safe?
Land prices rose and allotments looked on with suspicion as eyesores. Allotments were an anachronism. 
1964 Harry Thorpe recommended they be replaced by leisure gardens, private plots with summer houses and community cafes and toilets a patch of soil for the tower block inhabitant excised from green earth. 

p281
Carey's tongue in cheek articles for the sunday times in the 80s showed that vegetable gardens were chic again. 'the only adequate response is to thank god for chemical pesticides and use them liberally'
'unfortunately the strongest ad modt effective ones keep begin withdrawn from the market on the grounds that they have been found tot damage the env. So when you hit on a really lethal sort is a good plan to buy it in large quantities, which will allow you to go on using it after its outlawed.'

1980s garden sheds were stuffed with even more chems than those of the old kitchen gardens or the suburban 1930s. Science seemed the answer to all problems. nitrates to make everything grow and other products to make evyerthing dies. 

p286
houses built after 1946 had far smaller gardens and for a time garden advice books
p287
concentrated on cutting down work with ground cover and shrubs. There are little islands of heathers and dwarf conifers, with the odd azalea, a prunus to give height and blossom dn carpeting plants.
Early 60s RHS published illustrated handbooks 
LAnning Roper, Succesful Town Garden 1957 showed how cottage plants could bloom in the midst of cities despot eht pollution. Suggested tinted walls, trellises, richly coloured flowers and raised beds. 
Margey Fish Cottage Garden Flowers, and Ground Cover pPlants appeared in the 60s they redefined the notion of labour saving. 

p290
Gardeners QT 1947
Fred Streeter radios's best known kname with in your garden
TV PEry Thrower was the star of Gardening Club which began in 1956

p291
Daily Express commissioned a Harris Pol
was gardening too much hard work for the benefit it gave 73% disagreed, while 82% thought neglecting your garden was letting the community down. 

