GHK 1955

O’Cedar polish
O so easy 
Newspage
thoughts of recent Christmas jollity leads us quite naturally to the only verse contribution we can find space for this month - a terse expression of fundamental wisdom. 

Shopping list
Bayleaves and butter and haricot beans,
Juniper berries and aubergines,
Garli and Gruyere and creme de marrons, 
Saffron, salami and saucissons. 

Medoc and Macon and Chateau Margaux, 
burgandy, Claret and White Bordeaux, 
Cabernet Rose, the wine of Anjou, 
Chambertin, Vouvray and Beaucaillou. 

Seidlitz and senna and soda bicarb, 
Flowers of sulphur and phenobarb.,
Gregory powder and aspirin, 
Peppermint essence and paraffin. 
FMHB


Jan (p66) Seal awarded to Mothmaster (Dylon) cleans and protects carpets, blankets and woolens from moth and carpet beetle. 

Jan (p77-9) Marketplace
variety of gadgets, garments incTopps Silicone furnityre cream - write to mfcrs for free sample. ER Hoard Ltd Ipswich. (shows bottle of furtniture cream)
Feb p 34 UYour latest questions
dull lino - use sugar soap
iron mould on linen - oxalic acid or sals of lemon. Spread are over a basin and sprinkle on crysals fairly hickly.  Pour bouling water over and rinse immediately. As they are poisons, the crystals mus be handled with great care and all unused soln thrown away. Suitable only for white linen and cottons. 

article on perfum p61 - not mention chemicals - is an advert - special offer
no chems in Marketplace

Preludes to spring p179 George Whitehead
- lawn - scatter over dried blood or fine charcoal - bought from any sundreisman. Don’t buy special lawn stimulants at this time of year; they are god in due season but not now. 

March
startching from scratch - picture feature - She knows too that silicone polishes now made for tiles as well as for furniture give a shine that lasts for weeks. 

This is the Nenette dusting mop which was produced for her husband’s car but she finds it handy for inside dusting jobs. [this is funny because early GHK were full of car adverts with women at the wheel - none of this husbands car business. ]

April 
article
A New Word in Cleaning: Silicones p121-122
no fanfare to heral their coming new words arrive. At best one was vaguely aware that they were put into things presumable to imporve them. We are in the land of the Boffins. 
synthetic chemicals produced as fluids greases compounds resisn varnishes and rubbers. 
ot all polishs containing silicones say so on the label, though others boldly proclaim their silicone content. 
supplementary or main ingredient in polishes. 
deposit fine skin like film which repels particles of dust. No longer is hard rubbing nec - it may do more harm than good. 
leaves surface that is very easily cleaned. 
They are here to stay. easier housework. 

June
Washing pu Wisard - Marketkplace - gadget
polythene bottle fitted with a nylon and rubber brush set into rubber. Fill the wbottle with water and detergent or soap powder and as you wash up squeeze as much detergent as ou want into the water using the brush plate scraper at the same time. Economical, save powders. 1 spoonful will take care of a dozen dishwashings. 


Mitin Service dept - Why buy for moths full page advert
