The History of British Advertising Agencies 1875-1939
JAP Treasure

p5
1875 − 1900
kaldor described this period as the time when manufacturer domination took over from wholesaler domination in the economy - entrepreneurs were developing businessese which became household names, James Boot, Reckitt & Colman, Beechams. 
Kaldor “It was a natural development from this situaion that the mfcrs should attempt to creat a ‘goodwil’ by appealing so to speak - over the heads of the wholesaleers to the ultimate buyers, the consuming public. This was only possibly by providing the goods - in the form in which they reached the ultimate consumer - with brands carrying the mfcrs name or his legally protected trademark. the wholsalesr - not unnaturally - resisted this devp so that mfcrs trademarks in consumers goods were at first confined to patent medicine and certain other products which embodied some process secured by patents. But the mere provision of a trademark - even when combined with distintcive package, labelling and colouring - is not a very effective method of securing consumer goodwill - or rather the goodwill which is grounded in the buying habits of the ultimate consumer is generally a less secure and more fickle thing than the goodwill of professional buyers. Since consumers spend their income on a large number of things, and (in the gt majority of cases) only an insignidicant part of their income on any one article (which they prefer to buy with a minimum of fuss and bother) it is a difficult business to induce them to adopt buying habits sufficiently firm to make them demand a particular brand when purchasing a commodity ftom the retailers. It is here that large scale advertising has a vital role to play. Adv makes the public ‘brand concious’; it is not so much a question of making the consumer buy things which he would not have bought otherwise but of crystallising his routin habits, of making him consiouc that keeping to a certain routine in consumption means not only buying the same commodities in a vague sort of way but sticking to the same brands. It is probably no exaggeration to say that without the support of large scale adv 
p6
this attempt of mfcrs to release themselves form dependence on wholesalers goodwill, by building up consumers good will could not have succeeded.

consumers were being exposed to advertising for the first time in their lives and the produdcts being offered were also new - in quality, concept, packaging and presentation. Adv and sales went hand in hand. 

p7 
TB Browne Ltd - 1880, had 200 employees in London plus branches in Mcr, Glasgow, Paris. supplied market info and initiated speculative campaigns and ideas. 
powerful influence bringing about a change in the role of the advertising agent during this period was the media revolution which was taking place. Printing technology was advancing so quickly that faster and longer printing runs adn beter reproduction were being offered and improved on year by year. Newspaper owners under pressure to change attitudes towards advertising. 
1890s - max space allowed to any one advertiser was a single colum with no bold type. 1895 only the Daily Mail allowed double column advertisements and blocks but even the SM allowed nothing but small ads on it s front page. Restitctions relaxed and newpapers began to sell own adv space through their own space selling depts. Agent changed from being a spake broker with rights on certian pubs to being either a space borker pure and simple or twoards what would now be recognised as an advertsing agency. 


1902 first full front page advertisement appeared in Daily ail, by 1910 blockes were allowed into teh Times. 
Circulationa nd covereage risin as working classes gained education and disposable income. 

p9
providing  a service - not just selling space
1890s Moody’s offere to design advertisments and insert them upon the most advantageous terms in any newpaper in the world. 

Samula Benson - started up as an gant w back of the Bovril company “get the pay not as a space borker - but as a specialist - a creator of resutls. I cannot give full service, designs, ideas, personal visits of consultation , railway expenses, ope unp new sellig accounts, look over new fields, think up new channels of output and increase old ones for a mere ten per cent. The two percent agent creates neither new customers for the publisher nor new trade for the advertiser. “


p11
Cyril Hodges, copywriter with Lever Bros “I’d benn spending lunch time in a Fleet St pub... the artists used to like to meet there and we’d work up the idea together on the spot. I’d write my copy on the bottom of the illustration ... and in the afternoon took my copy to the Old Man - he always wanted to see it” Old Man - Lort Leverhulme. 


Ther was a yearly? Exhibition of Advertising or at least there was in 1912


p12 points out that war years bad for advertising
but
widespread use of advertising by the govt made  use of advertising more respectable. 
court case 1917 - law established that advertising agents were principals in so far as contracts with the media were concerned. 
1916 - foundation of the Association fo British Advertising Agents (laer the trad association of advertins agent sunde rhte name Insitute of Practitioners in Advertising) = to combat rebating of commission and convince the public that the properly qualified agent had a part to play in the **national evonomy**.

p14
1921 Cyril Freer the Service Agent will study the prospective customers, and will “infuse his selling arguments with human nature”  though he listed space buyers first, business experts last. 
When JWT was reformed in 1925 as a UK agent it had production nd media depts, writers and artdirectors, a head of research. 

Modern Advertising pulished around the same time starts with consultation and market research, then goes onto to space buying. 
That market research should be the basis of this development is understandable. Adv agents had long claimed to understand human nature, even in 1937 Crawfords in an advertisement were saying “the only way of selligngoods is though a kowledge of human nature. And what of skill we possess in Crawfods is in the sue we make of that knowledge. Rapidly changing social and economic conditions of the twenties and with the example of American practice, more than knowledge was neededL namely facts figure and informtaion. 

JWT  0 in USA the agency used consumer investigation on a wide scale, when london office started up in 1919 with American staff, the sema preoccupation was brough with them. 
Harold Stanbury (1955)  joined the office as a copywriter in 1921 “My first assingmnet on joining the firm, was to go out on a field investigation.. But even as late as 1924 market research was little known in England and practicesd not at all. JWT did stand out liek a sore thumb, it is true and its door to door investigating provided agency men with many a merry quip.”

ay claims to have carried out substantial caims before about 1930 were liekly to be apocryphal. While foundationa of social suvey work had been laid and techniques evolved, they were not used for business purposed for some years. Market reserach in agencies started wll before 1930. first record of a JWT survey for a client goes back to May 1923 when 200 customers and 60 dealer sin London and Glasgow were interviewed for Sunmaid Raisins. Between then and 1930 another 10 surveys were carried out for this client. 
1930 JWT letter to ponds “79000 individual interviews with consumers and traders which this offices has conducted during the past few years.” Frequency is striking - Kraft between 1929 and 1935 there were 24 investigations excluding product sampling ranging in size from 1250 housewifes to 50. 

attitude to reserach and info, derided at first, established itself fairly quickly in other agencies. Looking throgh trae advertisement by agencies in 1934, Samson Clark and Co putting market investigation first among their services “No Samson Clark ad campaign is commenced until the market fact sand fiures have een studied under a magnifying glass”
Statistical Review of Press Advertising July 1934 London (bok?) 


p16  knowing what the readership of newspapers and therefore ad - very patchy, 
London Reserach Bureau 1928 - Press Circulations Analysed - sampel 20 000, biased to middle classes, interviewing techniques, primitive. confusino between readership and home cirulation. 
big step forward 1936 − 40 000 sample, Daily Herald research carried out by JWT and British Market Resarch Bureau. first time that Gallup techniques of reading and noting used in bridtain. Individual readership (not home readership) was introduced and for the first time results tabulated for men and women readers sepaarately (though the marketing truth that women spend most of the household’s money had been stated before 1900). (Advertisers WEekly, 30th March 1939.)

so by 1939 the techniques were established. 

 

    