I expected to find more mentions of household chemicals in Daily Mail articles, but there were very few. There were some adverts for products that referred to household chemicals in terms of damage to hands and to furniture or fittings. 

There was a full page advert from Tesco promoting the inclusion of Bitrex into its own brand household chemicals in a bid to reduce child poisonings from its products, but beyond the one short campaign into locking up household poisons, there was nothing else. This shows that concern about household chemicals was not expressed in these pages in these terms. 

Searches for household poisons only yeilded that campaign, although interestingly when I forgot to constrain the search for the dates of this study, there was an article from 1926 by the ex-president of the pharmacuetical society on the problems of household poisons and their misleading names. Of course his slant was that trained pharmacists should remain the gatekeepers of these chemicals, in order to safeguard the public who in “ignorance or carelessness” might buy a chemical and poison themselves. He does not seem to count buying a chemical and storing it, then poisoning oneself at a later date through mistaking the bottle for something else.


searches for toxins - 
generally diptheria, lock jaw,  cholera, sleepy sickness (not to be confused with sleeping sickness) ptomaine poisoning - bacterial, botulism, food poisoning, snake bites, medical ailments, references in terms of the body’s functions  - e.g. asthma, gout, s

limestone phosphate - drink to wash away form the stomach liver and kidenys the previous day’s indugestible waste and poisonous toxins, keep the system free from uric acid.  Get from a chemist. Cost only two shillings. No brand name. Daily Mail arch 13 1930 p.17. advert

WEX Grape Saline - effervesting drink which thins the liver bile and quickly clears your blood of the harmful acids and toxins which are causing your skin to erupt. Within a week every spot pimple blemish vanishes - literally like magic. 02.05.35 p 11 advert





 