John Emsley
Molecules at an Exhibition
The science of everyday life
1998
credits the Media Resouce Service - part of th eNovartis Foundation London

p7
Rhubarb became infamous in WWI when people ate its leaves as a vegetable and some died through oxalic acid poisoning. 
Carl William Scheele had shown in 1784 that the oxalic acid in rhubarb leaves was too high to be edible.
rhubarb cooked in aluminium pans 0 cleaned because oxalic acid dissolved off top layer of metal

p9
commercially made by treating nitric acid or cellulose w sodium hydroxide. Corrosie solution. Only guise in which it might be found in the home is in stain removers ofr iron based stains, such as rust and ink from fountain pens. 

p14
phosphoric acid as found in cola. familiar with as rust remover. p15 Motorist motorcyclist and truck drivers in 60s and 60s used cola to clean the chrome bumpers, grilles and headlights. Acid reacted w chrome to form hard layer of chromium phosphate, which protected it. dissolved any rust and protected steel. Phosphates became blamed, dirty word in 70s and 80s, but need phosphates for normal biological functions. 

p89
"it was a place which chemistry was to transform, so that today it is cleaner, healthier, safer to live in, and with some remarkable labour-saving gadgets... cleaner because of detergents, healthier because of disinfectants and safer because the chemicals we use may be protected by other chemicals."

detergents portrayed as waton pollution of rivers, phosphates blamed for eutrophication. Surfactants produced from oil. Wanted altneratives 
RSPCA - oil slick birds - preferred two particular brands Fairy and Co-Op green because the surfactant rinsed away better, allowing the birds to become waterproof again. 

p93 phosphate - washing powder softens water, sequesters calcium keeps dirt in suspension. Other sources - fertilisers and domestic sewage 

p97
bleach sodium hypochlorite
really does kill germs. 
first use ?/ disinfect tap water at Maidstone 1897 typhoid outbreak. 
Ordinary bleach (although made form chlorine) is sometimes wrongly called chlorine bleach to distinguish it fro peroxide bleach, solun of hydrogen peroxide. In chlorine bleach there is no free chlorine gas, unless the soon becomes acidic. The bubbles which rise form such bleach when it is used is normally oxygen. 

Bleach - actively discouraged - ability to convert organic residues into organochlorine compounds, potential long term threat to he alt. 

carelessness/ ignorance try to safe time by using bleach and descaled together - neutralise alkali in bleach, making it acid enough to confer hypochlorite to chlorine gas - "real culpris is not bleach, which has saved millions of lives in its time, but ignorance. I people know a little chemistry thin it is safe to use bleach"

p99
parents imagine it is dangerous if it touches the skin. Smell alone should deter children from drinking. Threat is not as dangerous as you may fear. Neutralise with water and bicarbof soda. Parents protect children by looking of household chems to which a bittering agent is added. Bleach does not take Bitrex. 

p109
most dangerous subs for child to ingest are turps, paraffin, caustic soda, alcohol (scent and aftershave) and paints tripper. 
110
Bitrex T&H Smith 1958 when searching for new lignocaine painkiller/ local anaesthetic. non toxic soluble white powder - denatonium benzoate. 




p262
"chemiphobia"
aversion to all things chemical, not stem from industrial accidents, but from dangers lurking in everyday matierl. 
tighter safety precautions after Bhopal, Rhine poisoning etc but damage done. Chemicals industry appeared to be uncaring

alarms - 
chemists are saddened by the fact that our language has been hijacked and turned to our disadvantage 0  the word chemical and drug are the examples the cite most often. Fro many people drug means abuse or addition, cruelly dismissive phrase drug addict. Also means to heal. drug less misused/ confused than chemical. 

ultimate cause of things can be traced to a chemical process. 
p264 
often a behaviour that is more dangerous than the chemical






