We care about water

p1 Natural water sources have a remarkable capacity for breaking down wste products and this capacity can be, and indeed is used to dispose of the waste we create. However, care must be taken not to woverwhelm nature’s self cleaning capapbilities, thus causing pollution. Balanced control must be exercised...

p3... The water in the UK is probably more intensely monitored than in all other industrial countries. 
Improvements in water quality in England and Wales - graph starts at 80 and goes to 94, covering classes I and II - so magnifies the amount that they’ve imporved from 1958. Class 1 indicates water of highquality  suitabe for potable supply and other abstracions, game and other fisheries, high amenity value, Class II is suitable for potable suppl after advanced tmt, supporting reasonably good coarse fisheries, moderate amenity value. 

p4Describes dramatic improvements in water quality tidal Thames 1957(0sp) − 1977 (100sp) 

No specific information on any chemical industries really, just how the UK is matching efforts in the EEC. 

p6 We in the UK carea bout our water and continue to care for the env in general. For its part the chem ind has invested many millions of pounds to conrol polln from mfc sites and it will not shrink from implementing further protective measures which may be req under the EQO approach. 

followed by picture of man labelling up fish smaples, but the caption is Resaerch into the coagulation process for the removal of turbitity in water. 

Annex 2 
EEC Directives for the protection of the aquatic env

Directive on detergents
Directive on themethod of contorl of the biodegradabilit of oanionic surfactants. 
Directive on wastef rom the titatnium dioxide industry
value limits and  standards for mercury waste from the electrolysisi of alkali chlorides. (also chlor alkali electrolysis industry)
surveillance and monitoring of env aaffected by wastes form the titanium dioxide industry
cadmium
hexachlorocyclohexane





1983 version of We Care About Water produce by the Chemical Industries Association. 

situates chemical industry wastes along with all other manufacturing, office an dhome wastes. directly addresses public concerns
p3	“The reason for this booklet
	The chem ind recognises that members of the public are genuinely concerned aobut the way in which it disoposes of its wastes. The public have v real fears of the unknown and are worried abou tpossible long-term consequences. Quite understandably the want local nuisance and inconvenience arising from waste disposal operations to be kept to a minimum. Clearly therear erisks assoc with the dosp of wast, just as there are risks assoc with all facets of everyday life. The chem ind is eperience in handling its waste and can control and minimise these risks. Chem cos are committed to dealing with wastes safely and accept their responsibility to protec public health and the environment. The ind places pecial emphasis on controlling pollutatnts, reclaiming and ecycling usable by-products andmanaging hazardous wate. The chem ind welcomes informed debate as a menas of increasing public understanding and confidence. As its contribution it has produced this booklet.”
	
	No specific examples of accidents are given, though there are images of reclaimed / treated sites in the front covers. Examples of support from investigations are given
	
	“Landfill is the disposal optin which arouses most reaction from the general publica nd adverse comment in the media. However this disposal route has been and continues to be the subject of detailed sci investigations, supported by government, industr and other boeids. As a result we now have considerable knowledge about good site selection, correct methods of deposition, the tpes of waste whch can be safely disposed of by thei route and the monitoring required. 
		The resutls of the Cooperative Programme of research on the Behaviour of Hazardous Wastes in Landfill Sites were published in 1978 by the Dept of the Env an the main conclusions were:-
		
			Extensive experience in the UK over a long period of time has shown that very few documented cases of significant groundwater contamination due to lf have occured, thus indicating that the controlled disp of w by lf is acceptable. The research findings generally have confirmed this view and have now provided the basis for a better understanding of the natural processes involved. The conc reached is that sensible landfill is realistic and an ultra-cautious approach to lf of haz and other types of w is unjustified”.
			
	Codisposal advantages (household w breaksdown or immobilises industrial wastes)
	
	refers to the “complex system... large no of chem, phys and bio processes” at work in the landfill site with emphasis on “rendering them innocuous”(no mention of anything becoming more noxious in there), as well as how many regulatory hoops are needed  to be jumped through.

p8
“Until the early 1970s there was no legislation specifically designed to control waste disposal. This does not mean that there was no control at all. Planning laws, common law, public health acts and local acts all ha thier part to play. Since the early 1979s a comprehensive legal framework to protect the env and to safeguard the general public from bad waste disposal practices has been evoolved. 

Deposit of Poisonous Waste Act 1972 - the first sp piec of leg dealing w wd.  repeale and replace by
Control of Polln Act 1974 and regs made under it. 
severe penalties, esp poisonous and polluting waste are flytipped. 

Final para in booklet (before Appendices)
Chemicals are used extensively for the benefit of mankind and people will continue to demand the v wide range of products made ossible by chemistyr. In meeting this demand the chem ind will inevitabley produce waste products and a means for their disposall must be available. There is a need to strike a balance between the benefits obtained from the chem ind and the env effects of its operations
for many rs the chem ind has been imporving every facet of its operations to maximise benefits and mninimise its effect on the env. It works with gov tan la to study waste mgt practices to make improvement where these are show to be nec and to develo ptimely and practical regulation.s 
We in the chem ind do care about he safe disp of our wast and are commmitted to the continuation of this care. 

