ICI

A survey by the times 

it says 
compiled from a survey by the times May 30 1961

(compiled from a 24 page report/set of articles printed in the The Times May 30 1961)

published, London Printing House Suare 1962
p3 A Giant is born: Time sp cor

Brunner Mond & Co took over uncompleteed Govt plant at Billingham - large scale synthetic nitrates
		firm founded at Winninton nr Northwich, ammonia soda process for th emfcr of alkali. 
		
Utd Alkali Co formed of 40cox in Widnes area, making socium carbonat eby the old Leblanc soda process. United to meet threat posed by more economical ammonia soa proces. 

p13  Older production centres based on native bulky raw mateial: coal, salt brine, limestone, anjydrite. 
Dyestuffs mostly coal tar derivatives 
Alkali reured brine, limestone ad coal
anhydrite at Billinham provided the basis of ammonium sulphate in conjunction with ammonia which was coal based. Cement and sulphuric acide also based on this anjudrite. 

An outcome of the trend to make more highly finished products is that the company has more internal markets for own primary chemicals and many intermeidates. Highly complicated internal interchance of materials withint the co between different divisions. 

p17Pattern shaped by Production
special laboatories - indusrial hygiene lab -physiological risk ot factory workers and customers that might arise from handling new mateials. Central Instrument Lab - devt inst and process control techniq. Akers Resarch Labs - now more closely integrated with the divisional structure, long range fundamental character, biological ad inorganic chemistry. No just the perogative of sp funciton labs - done throughout the divisional labs :Just because our concern is with the practicla application iof science, we do not have to be short-sighted or supercificl in our approach Dr Ferguson. it has alwasy been ICI’s policy to take the long view, right from the foundation, and even when our research is concerned with the immediate problems of making plants run efficnetly and keeping in step with ever increasing demands of the market for higher qulity proucts it still depends in a deep fundamental understandin of the sci principles involved. : 

p19
deliberate entry at the right time into pest control. Alex Todd - selective weedillers, the other was to carry forward their discovery that benene hexachloride was a good insecticie. Other discoveries, non arsenical chemical for weedkilling. used for destroying the above ground part of potat oplnts as a prliminary to mech harvesting. 

Gibberellic acid - - natural plant hormone/ growth regulator. 

p29

One of the problems in assessint the compnay’s position is that therre are large parts of the chemical industry untrouched by ICI while large sections of our business lie outside the industry. e.g. soap nd dergent business of firms such as Lever sna Thomas Hedleys used substatial quantities of basic materials bought from us, but ICI itself does not make soap or similar products classed as chemicals. 

some parts of industry are epanding rapidly, other only slowly some are static. In particular the petrochems plastics and synthetic firbre, frowing and likelty to continue to grw, while some to fht eheavy chems such as soda ash and cuastic soda have only a steady rate of growth comparatble to that of the industires they supply. Public duty to go on making the essential basic chemicals even though the sales may appear to be less progressive and less profitable. ICI could no withdraw from the procution of industrail explosives, soda ash and caustic soda withouth givinet govt and public many year notice of intention. 

How Contact is Kept with the consumer

Lord MArks, chairman of M&S - met socially with Lord McGowan, often discussed imptc of sicnetific research to the textile industry. M&S already in close touch with the public but how could they access what scientist were doing, and apply that to improving goods sold. ... Able to offer M&S as a market research and advisory organisation capable of trying out new products int he quickest morst efective way in our own stores. [Doesn’t actually say how this worked practically, or what M&S actual contact with consumers was, seems to be testing rather than learning what they might want i.e. push]