May and Baker
Judy Slinn

p146
Industrail expansion for all firms was held back in 1947 by the fuel crisis of that year. Sever winter of 46-47 coal industry unable to meet extra demands on it. By Jan 47 M&B were suffering form shortage of raw materials, esp those normally purchased from ICI who were unable to mfc due to fuel shortage. 

p147
M&B ventured into agrochemicals - WFH Rawles plant pathologist managed sales of Seardix A, devoted in USA. Hormonin A, Merck payed Boyce Thomson Institued a royalty. Licence was offered from the intestate through Merck to M&B. Modest sales pre war, then competition from other products, Boots and ICI, all introduced rooting compound. 

1938 limited research. Calomel dust - Cyclosan. 

p149
Cyclosan and Seradix sold during war, though little research/expt

land at Dagenham factories used for the dig for victory campaign, produce sold to the M&B canteen. 
Rawles also involved in p holographic work, at end of war he chose photography.
Agorchem handed over to Dr Hart. 
Keith Carpenter recruited to establish hort and ag research in 1947. 

Dr Barber chemical research manager saw potential of agrochem research, sample of 2,4-D sent by Merck during war to M&B - tested it successfully on his own lawn, but was unable to do further research with the trial sample. American Chemical Paint Co, obtained 2,4-D ester known as Weedone in USA nd field trials carried out. Led to Dicotox a 2,4-D ester that controlled broadleaved weeds in wheat barley and turf. 
 
 cramped conditions for the agricultural unit/division at Dagenham until they moved to Boarded Barns Farm at Ongar. An orchard was planted there and in 1952 the move from Dagenham took place. New  compounds were synthesised to be examined and tested for herbicidal insecticidal and funcigical properties. 
 
 p150 
 chance - process run for 10 hours for the convenience of a visiting film crew gave a much better yield 78% than usual 3% (a shorter run) Had been making phenoxy butyric acids. collaboration between Prof at Wye College and a postgrad student working with M&B. Discovery was patented by the National Research Development Corporation (through Wye College) and M&B used the pentet. 
 
 p155
 all industry in mid late fifties expanded, esp for chem industry whose growth rate outstripped most other escorts. Cosy prewar arrangements, networks of cartel arrangements had been swept away by the war. Competition was the ofrr of the day, after the Restrictive Practices Act of 1956 made price fixing impossible. 
 
 Conservative govt abolished last of the war time controls on building controls, restriction on the issue of capital. As the company's liability for excess profits was settled, repayments form the Inland Revenue became available to finance development and with recovery of economy general it became easier for industrial companies to borrow.
 
 

