Rising Tide lessons from 165 Years of brand building at P&G
Davis Dyer, Frederick Dalzell, Rowena Olegario
Harvard Business School
Boston
pp467

P&G
p57 market research - initiated by D Paul “Doc” Smelser who asked questions like “how many people use ivory for washing their hands and face, how many use it for dishwashing, how many use it for both?” 
learned as they went - e.g. test perfumes should be in soap, which should be used not just looked at or smelt. an art to asking questions. 

First brand to incorporate market resarch into design was Camay - only test worthwhile on shape of the bar. Packaging to replace original one. This proved its worth, build up the Market Reserach Dept. Women investigators joined in 1929 many ransferring from Crisco’s field crews. 1931 Smelser decided they’d make a major commitment to field reseach - hiring female collage grads and sending them door to do to survey hommakers about all kinds of household product and habits. 

p69
wetting agent - surface active agent surfactant, bond with oil on one end and water on the other should make it a detergent. This would even work in hard water areas. Synthetic detergent. Difficult to get going, many dead ends. Sodium pyrophosphate recently became commercially available, getting interesting resutls.  - had to happen when other new materials became available



environmental issues - P&G became a target of envmt concerned aobut chemicals in wash water discharged into public water supplies. Alkyl benzene sulfonate (ABS) occasionaly caused foaming on the banks of rivers and strema.s Public perception grew that detergent makers were to blame for significant water pollution. Issue was followed over enzymes possibly because of a misimpressions created by ads depcting enzymes devouring dirt. Enzyme based detergents such as Ariel were widespread in Europe and caused little problem, but by 1971 P&G felt pressured to withdraw despite introducing them in 1967. 

1960s phsophates were controversial. Ised in many industiral product - added to laundry detergents to soften water and suspecn soil removed form clothes. Linked to accelerated eutrophication. P&G maintained that phosphates from untreated sewage and fertilisers were the main cause but public were unconvinced. Several cities banned phosphates. FTC threatened to label them as pollutants. Did not want to compromise brand so withdrew until acceptable alternatives had been created. A massive distaction, spending more than $130million searching for replacement. 