The architect who designed the World Trade Centre wrote in 1973 in response to the NYT's architecture crititic Ada Huxtable.

He seems to have been very much focoused on the users and the uses of the building, as a good architect should be. 
"As far as 'lace' is concerned t is a valid component of the truss. We have three columns 40" on the centre above, which translate to a single column at the base of the building, giving what you call a sense of Gothic design. In my view the concept of the wall its relationship to the mass of the building and its details are consistent with Emerson's thoughts "it reaches beauty by taking ever superfluous ounce that can be spared ... keeping its strength in the poetry of the columns..." I certainly have no shame in this, because the wall is purely and throughly economic way to bring the land down and makes possible sufficient openings at the base for people and materials to easily pass through. This delicate wall ,which you call "dainty" is not only a very beautiful
p3
truss, but it carries floors with spas of sixty and thirty seven feet. These floors are completely column free going maximum freedom in circulation and in office and furniture arrangement. To me, this is on tof the gifts of our technology, when we can build 110 story buildings with both human scale elements and the advantage of long spans. 

For me, the day of the all-glass building is finished. The problems which come from lifting and installing enormous panes of glass, which are then shaded by curtains more than half of the day, are almost ridiculous. When glass size is pushed unreasonably, there are structural problems which arise: as you area aware, on several recent occasions in two of our major cities, large panes of glass have been blown out, to the point where buildings had to be barricaded and the pedestrians protected. Large glass, as lovely as it may be, requires a tremendous consumption of energy for heating and air-conditioning to combat the extremes of temperature. Moreover glassy building send to be curtain displays -- some closed, some half open, some open -- which adds a more restless quality to an already restless city. 

[Large glass for observation areas.]... In normal working conditions a reasonable amount of glass is of course necessary, so that people may be aware of whether it is beautiful and sunny, or rainy and miserable outdoors, giving them contact with the outside world. It also should be present tin sufficient quantities to give relief to the frequency monotonous work which goes on in the normal office. In many all-glass buildings, the people who work and live there have a strong sense of acrophobia, which makes their lives uncomfortable. [fear of heights] 