He Knew He Was Right

James Lovelock

Shell were using his ECD from the late 1950s, early 60s, before Carson’s book. research centre in Kent and at the US FDA to measure pesticide residues in the environment. This evidence “lent veracity to Caron’s otherwise unprovable statements” p109  However, frustrated with people who disdain science but are happy to use the results form ECDs to support misguided crusades to get everything banned. ECDs so sensitive can detect absolutely trivial amounts of pesticides. 

p98-99
consultant for Shell, annual fee of £1500 based at home, visiting london once a month. 
compares govts to companies - govts look ahead only to the next election, big businesses like shell plan for 20 yrs or more into the future. In Lovelokc’s experience, business have been more concerned about the damage to env than govts, if env degradation occurs o the point of economic collapse, businesses lose a lot of customers. “Self styled environmentalists who see all big companies as evil despoilers of nature are very far form the mark. Shell made pesticides like dieldrin and DDT in response to a public demand to save lives and provide more food a well as to make a profit. But as soon as the problems with these pesticides were appreciated, Shell stopped making them, long before governments acted and it became illegal to carry on. Today its clear that companies like Shell will in future make bigger profits by making products that alleviate pollution and global warming so they are bound to follow that course of action. 

p180 met Thatcher in Oct 1988, invited to a dinner at downing st, directly linking this to an invitation to return in April 1989 for a seminar on climate change. Notes Thatchers experience of science and industry, predicted environmentals would usurp the political agenda in years ahead. The only head of state who could have personally handled a sci meeting like the env seminar. 

p154
BBC Horizon interview in 1983 came to Lovelock’s house, Coombe Mill. 

Dartington Hall, nr Totnes, visited in the 80s as hippies etc had been first to embrace Gaia theory, he recognised that they did his theory no favours and had to find scientific support. No support, massive lambasting from Dawkins in 1982. 