Catherine - ns to sociologst

certainty - science ?

language - multiple meanings, translation between fields

capability of audience? underestimated? and therefore dumbed down? 

I don’t understand where this argument came from. 

error and failure can lead to unintended good consequences

why do people continually violate themselves by reading traumatic stories?  HH

Kirsten Donaldson - look up - writes on 1930s popular science writing, mentioned that this was lambasted at the time for the whole “little bit of knowledge” is dangerous in the hands of the public

Point from Sam Solnick
	Chemical (e.g. DDT, fibreglass) has agency and acts in unpredictable ways that we did not expect. Human agency does not come into it. 
	
Point from Jo Applin  
	Artists knew that their work would change as their experimental materials dried out or degraded. 
	
Point from Helen Harrop
	Get sold as solution to a bproblem, but the consequences are either unknown, not addressed, hidden or deemphasised, cites film on White Gold - asbestos and the subsequent “carnage” that has taken place. 


Jo Applin’s talk on plastic sculpture
	Artists were using new and experimental processes and materials, which many directly linked to health conditions later in life when it became evident that some form of protective equipment should have been employed. 
	Artists and hobbyists used Sculpmetal, which you mixed together and burnished to produce a shiny metal like surface - *what is this product? look it up*
	
	The plants and other natural forms that the artist sketched often included variations on gas masks, the artist had one in her workshop, which symbolised the polluted air that the plants were breathing, and we were breathing too. 
	
	
Common place vs apocolyptic situations
		Are my users experiencing any apocolyptic consqeuences in their product choices?  Would this be a useful oral history question or not? Perhaps a sense of resilience/ fragility/ threat in general e.g. gas attack, nuclear war, terrorist bomb would be an interesting sense to get.
		
		Spencer Ward? has done a comprehensive study of the images and language used in nuclear history
		What languages images are used or avoided in promotions or discussions about domestically used chemicals? 
		
		Civil defence tests on domestic structures, and those containing mannequins of people in domestic scenesare horrifying and make more real the threat to personal safety - the home is supposed to be safe, a haven. 
		
