Waste and Pollution 
Changing views and environmental consequences
Craig E Colten
p171-207 in 
The Illusory Boundary

p174
manufacturers sought savings and improved efficiency. postwar economics did not sustain some of these practices, but inefficiency remained part of the definition of waste. In the 1980s as popular concern about hazardous wastes crested, waste management experts merged a new environmental ethic with efficiency concerns and sought again to improved industrial efficiency by extracting viable elements from industrial wastes and putting them bac to use. 

p175
by late 1950s cities aim to minimize enviromental impacts of waste by using sanitary landfils - cover and compact garbage. exclude scavengers, prevent reuse. Susan Strasser *Waste and Want* says that there wasa fundamental shft from a reuse orientation to a throwaway one. 

p176
the meaning of pollution has changed, acquiring more precise regulatory definitions in recent years. Donal Hughes - ancient Greeks considere dpolution a “ most egregious violation that was believed to bring divine punishment on the polluter.” In Greek and LAtin the term for pollution carried the connotation of ritual impurity. Roman definition included the notion of sullying with fith. In more recent use in English, the word pollute emphasised human, not environmental, degredation. Defilement of an individual;s blood, or the sanctity of churches by profane acts.   Before mid nineteenth centyre, pollute and pollution spoke to violation , perversion or corruption of moral standards. 

decline in the word *pollution* between 1840s and 1900 as well as a shift in the usage to refer to environmental issues after the American Civil War ended in 1865. Campanella added nuance to Rome’s survey by illustrating the wider usage of pollution to refer to defilement of more than just the human soul. This shif is significant for it relect the growing concern owith environmental contamination, the expanding technoligcal capabilities to diminish air water and land resources and an increasingly sophisticated set of tools to monitor and detect violations of accepted stanards. ... Urban society was fouling its own nest and also passing its unwanted pollution downwind and downstream. ... Leagal standard for pollution remained fleible and was contingent on many factors including local circumstances and individuals willing to lodge formal complaints. 

p190 
Contamination from natural sources or human activities that exceeds society’s tolerance  = pollution. Therefore excess or pollution is a moving target. 

Quantity of waste and resilience of environment recieving it are important.

Pollution depends on social dimensions - chemical composition and environmental persistence of society’s waste products, with prevailing tolerance for levels of waste, for ability to measure pollutants and to establish them as a cause for degradation. Pollution is a social construction.  - See also The Road to Love Canal