Best of British 
Richard and Aldgate
contextual cinematic history  - analyse content and structure of groups of films, box office trends, star personalities and their apeal, contemporary reviews adn reactions, staging, lighting and action styles, fan magazines, censorship and picture palaces and locate all of these in the social political and cultural context.

Little so far on British contextual cinematic history - see Charles Barr’s *Ealing Studios*

Asks how actors related to their roles, what audience needs did they fulfil, what did the stars embody, how did heroes change and what does it tell us about Britain?

p1 1920s- 1950s cinema was the principal leisure activity for a large propportion of British people, esp working class of all ages though not the elderly so much. Cinema relects and highlights popular attidutdes ideas and preoccupations and to generate and inculcate views and opions deemed desirbale by film makers/ sponsors. 

p2 cinema can act as social control, transmitted dominant ideology of society and creating for it a consensus of support. Provides images of lives attitudes and values of various recognisable groups in society. Provide images of society of a whole, organised into a pattern goverened by a set of underliying presuppositions. Instruction in correct behaviour, express its beliefs about what is right and wrong. Genre films use the same elements again and again as rituals, cementing beliefts and ideals, exposing and isolating deviants. Promote conformity of dress hairstyle, voabulary, attitudes and world wview. 

Audencie not passively accept all messages. Choose which films to see nad which to not. 

Films are a collaborative effort and not all are perhaps named. 

Need to have an idea of whether there will be an audience for this - many based on plays and books - cinematizations 

p43 at the start of WWII all cinemas in Britain were closed. Value to morale was appreciated and they soon reopened  - recreation, escapist, informational and instructional. 

British Board of Film Censors and Ministry of Information. 
		what Britain was fighting for, how Britain was fightin and the need for sacrifice
		
		
		
p115 Films about industrial relations were few and far between in the mainstream British cinema between 1930s - 1950s. Vexed and contentious issues, rarely free from controverys. Producers and scriptwriters were prompted to steer clear of the matter. Little in the subject that would recommend it as viable commerical proposition. 

relations of Capital and Labor was a taboo subject that greatly exercie the collective mind of te British Board of Film Censors. 

p119 Alexander Mackendrick’s The Man i nthe Whte Suit (1951) management was capable of deeds as dark as anything done by workers or representatives. 
Everlasting suits mean fewer new ones to be bought and less work for the facoties (A topical parallel: the mfcrs cartel against long life light bulbs on which the Monopolies Commission reported in 1951 the year of the films’ release)The owners hastily get oether sort Birnley out and combitne ot suppress the invention.  Barr

The film conjured a bleak vision of industry and industirla relations: capital and labour were out to do the country down. Not without substance in a period that was distingiehed by the ‘gathering cold war which affected B industrial relations, with a snobbish adn often uninformed mgt entrenched on one side with an immodile unambitious workforce deeply attahced to long traditions on the other. Vision gained credence by the time fo I’m all right jack in 1959 

p120  industrial cold war   widening gulf between mgt and workforce. Increase in mumber of strikes, strikers and working days lost from the mid 50s onwards. betfore 1955 annual average of 1791 strikes with 545000 workers

enhanced status of unions after war, increased bargaining power and full employment stimulated a rise in TU membership throught he 50s but even during the war itself some workers came to feel that union leaders wer enont fully representing the interst of the rnk and file. Many of the strikes that ensued during the 50s were unofficial and not antioned by the appropriate union. 

