sunday times book exhibition?  - advertisng
Whittakers cululative book list - divided by sujectand alphaetical

Bookseller is not even sales figures, but what is due to come out in the coming week/month, general booktrade news, what is banned in the Irish Free STate

Jan 23 1935, p51
An AMerican considers the English book trade
IS the book club (american style) possible or desirable in England?

three-fifths of even urban Amercia is not served by any book store. 
remainders sold through every channel but book stores - esp cigar store and chemist	- public used to seeing bargains in books procelaimed t every prminient corner by they have never learned to go to their bookseller for bargains. 

Apparently every British subject has a ilbrary subsciption - never Ill buy a copy of that. 
A book club means only another way of orrowign books.

In America a book club is a society which helps its members buy books
	Literary Guild - Wings (advertising/reviewing new books)
	Book of the month club - News  (ditto)
	purchase a min of 4 books / yr, billed at published price - buy 4, get a dividend (book in special edition) more boks=more dividends
	Clubs pay $8000 (£1600) outright to the publisher adn author for the right to print perhaps 32000 copies (25c / copy)
	
	Doubleday One Dollar Book Club - no obligation to buy, no membership fee, cancel at any time. Members pay one dollar only for the books of th ebest selller type, well worth 2- 3.50. Book sent each month - return the book or return a dollar, plus postage or select another book from the bulletin. Has been inoperation for nearly 3 yrs. 
	
	jan monthly list
	
	bot, hort, ag
	
	AS Barker  -the use of fertiisers: manuring of crops in gb
	
	chem&phys
	Harvey - Laundry Chemistry - manual on the Chemistry of laundry
	
	technical
Harris PW	a manual for home cinemtoghrphers
Ottley - making home movies
reyner jh - cine-photography for amateurs

feb tech
bennett cn elements of photogravure - photprinting from copper plates
bot hort ag
amatuer gardenig annual - review of the yr in garden & greenhouse ed Macself
Surrons amateur’s guide to hort and general garden see catologue for 1935
the studio gardening annual ed Mercer 

april
Adams - making a photograph - an intro to photography

May
Patterson - week0end gardenign
Ilford Amateur photographic handbook
Ottley - the cine-amatuers workshop

July
Sherlock - Gardeners How Book
dorotyh myerson - homemakers handbook - an economic standard practice mnul

Dec
kate kennedy - The science of homemaking
margaret weddel  - house book
Brett - smallholder poultry keeper and gardener year book
Horth - 101 things for girls to do - - - books like this might hav elittle experiemnts or projects to od with household products or chemicals?

