Science and Everyday Life
JBS Haldane
London 
Lawrence and Wishard Ltd 1939

Contents list doesn’t really show anything to do with pollution or chemicals

possibly Bad Air - in the home, school and Barracks - in the factory - colliery Explosions  compressed air illness, the strange case of rahman bey (disease, oygen, fire damp, after damp)

poss med and soc  - inustiral accidents, industiral disease, economics of cancer  iron lunghs the mothers’ striike, book transfusion, blood and iron


p236

Back to Nature?
Among the numerous critical letters which I have recieved as  a result of my articles on drugs have been several from readers who believed that while sodium bromide and paraldehyde , for example , were “vile chemicals”, herbal preparations were natural and therefore superior to artificial ones. This canot be a universal rule for opium and hashish are prepared directly from herbs and morphine, cocaine, strychnine and many other eadly substances are extrated from them. 
Neverthe less theres is somethin in the argument. We have got much farther from Nature than was necessary. We meet hust the smae problem in politics. The history of the Labour movement is full of attempts to go back to primitive communism. But they failed, and now we know that communism can only succeedd if we take over the machines developed under capitalism, but see to it that they are our slaves instead of the other way round. 
The story of man is largely the story of substitutes for natural products. We do not know whether pmritive men lost their body hair because they starte wearing clothes or started wearing clothes because they had lost their hair. But the latte ris more likely. The result is that man can live in a greater range of climates than any other animal, provide he can dress properly. But we easily become the slaves of clothes, liek the unfortunate guardsment who sweat under bearskins in summer.  etc etc et
The right wuestion to ask about any divergences form Nature is whether they do more harm than good. Are houses harmful. Almost certainly not. But too great a conc of popn is so. Even the well to do people in towns have shorter lives on te average than agricultural labourers. 
Are artificial foods harmful/ Thos who say Yes are apt to forget that bread is extremely artivical and was propb not invented less than 10 000 yrs ago. Butter again is no more a natural product than margarine. We have to investigate each food in detail. If we do we shall certainly find that man of the recently introduced foods are less nutritious than the older ones. But some are not. A marge properly equipped with vitmins is almost certainly better than butter from a cow which has spent the whole winter in a shed living mainly on oilcakes. 
It is the sme with drugs. Very few are invariably harmful. All are harmfull if we take too much of them. This is as true for natural as artifivcal products. To go back to Nature here generally means to take substance sin unknown amts intstead of known ones....
I am sure tha men , womenadn childresn should not be allowed to eat or drink new chemicals until they have been v throughly tried out on animals. This is generally done with new drugs, but not always with colouring matters in food or substances used for flavouing sweets. 
....All such slogans as “back to nature” aremenaingless unless we consider the economic system within which the change is to operate, and very often as in this case, we find that within a better eco numic system the change would be largley unnecessary.  p239