charlady
Hansard

Charladies invoked when example of impoverished old person required, then later when dealing with part time work and taxation (specifically evasion). 

PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND TAXATION
HC Deb 04 November 1970 vol 805 cc1086-218
Mr. John Horam (Gateshead, West)
Beyond that there is the whole area of tax evasion shading off into tax avoidance. I know that some hon. Members would consider that this activity is entirely monopolised by the richer sections of the community. This is certainly not my experience. Many of us are dependent on the good offices of a charlady to keep our houses clean. Some of us have had our houses decorated by people in their spare time. I am certain that a great percentage of these people do not declare those earnings and, frankly, with present rates of taxation, I do not blame them


PENSIONERS' INCOMES AND UNDATED GOVERNMENT STOCK
HL Deb 22 November 1972 vol 336 cc956-94
LORD DAVIES OF LEEK
In their Annual Report for 1931 the London Advisory Council said: One in every ten girls becomes a servant, and when they become grey they move from the status of servants to charwomen. In the 1931 Census, one woman in four in London was a charwoman because there was no other way to earn a living. Now that is not undignified. But these charladies were then in their late 50s or 60s, and they were considered old ladies. That was a favoured profession in the hungry 'thirties. To-day the charwoman has a more dignified place in our social accountancy and makes a contribution, but in those days she was a domestic navvy. The widow of to-day has not had the square deal that she should have had in her loneliness and from the accounts of this nation. I hope that we shall go beyond Beveridge so far as the widow is concerned.


Rate Support Grant (Wales)
HC Deb 16 February 1982 vol 18 cc235-58
Mr. Ray Powell (Ogmore) 
From playschools and playgrounds to parks and playing fields, paths and pavements, from school transport, school meals and school books to school teachers and in some 250 areas even schools themselves, all have had to be slashed. Transport in Wales is in a mess, housing is in decline, and health and social services a disaster area. Lollipop ladies, school dinner ladies, school cleaners and social workers have been thrown out of their jobs. Meals on wheels for the elderly are becoming a treat from the past and home helps are once again becoming the charladies of the rich. It is not just the return of unemployment to the 1930s but the return of school leavers to domestic service and the return of the workers to serfdom—all brought about by two and a half years of Thatcherism.


Jobseekers Bill
HL Deb 16 May 1995 vol 564 cc494-554
Baroness Williams of Crosby
Many things are wrong with the back-to-work bonus as an incentive to "Jerusalem". The most important is that it depends upon discovery. First, you have to know that the individual is earning more than £5, in order that you can take the rest of the money away, or deduct it from the individual jobseeker's allowance, keep it in the piggy bank and give it back to him when he has a full-time job. But we know that in the majority of cases, because of the rules, we do not get discovery—most people in such situations do not declare the money. Of course they do not; we cannot blame them for it; the rule is ridiculous.

§ The efficacy of the provision depends on discovery or a sudden mass outbreak of honesty among all charladies in the country. That is not very likely. But the Bill does not deal with the heart of the problem, which is the earnings rule. The Government say: "Somehow, if we do this, we shall know how much they have; we shall stop it and only give half of it back".

