hansard
cleaning product

1930s - lots of refs to clean milk, clean herds etc, spring cleaning as a turn of phrase (Rather than domestic), clean rice, clean agriculture, clean rivers, cleaned coal

COMBINED OPERATIONS (TRAINING).
HC Deb 15 March 1934 vol 287 cc664-719
Mr Janner
fees for students in these Army vocational centres fluctuated according to rank; and were, for a lance-corporal and private 5s. a week, for a lance-sergeant and corporals 6s. a week, for a staff sergeant and sergeant 7s. a week, for a warrant officer, 2nd class, 8s. 6d., and for a warrant officer, 1st class, 10s. a week. 700 In my view these fees are too high. The bulk of these trainees come from the infantry, and the minimum rate of pay in the lower ranks of the Army are, for a private 3s. a day, a lance-corporal 3s. 9d. a day, and a corporal 4s. 9d. a day. I believe that the rates for cavalry and artillery are much about the same. It must be clear that the most that an infantryman can draw is one guinea per week, and out of this he has to pay for his washing, for cleaning materials, for hair cutting, barrack damage charges and sports subscriptions. An addition of 6s. for vocational training hits the man heavily indeed



UNEMPLOYMENT BILL.
HL Deb 05 June 1934 vol 92 cc801-44
Lord Marley
I have here a letter from a girl working in a mill. She says: I am a ring spinner in a Lancashire mill. My husband is out of work and we have two children. I go out to work at 7.15 in the morning, so as to be there for 7.45. I run round four sides all day till 5.30, with only the hour break for dinner; at the end of the week I get 29s. 3d…. 1 am dead tired when I come home at night, what with bad work and the heat and not able to get much nourishment…. My husband does all the housework and washing, except ironing and baking. I iron the clothes on one night during the week, and on Sunday I bake. This keeps me busy till dinner time, and then I just get to rest a bit on Sunday afternoon. With my husband being out of work every shilling is precious. He cannot get anything on the means test as they say we have 2s. 3d. over the limit. The scale is 27s. for four. Then she tells how she spends her big income: Rent, 7s. 6d.; coal, 3s. 8d.; milk, 1s.; insurance, 1s.; union, 9d.; gas, 1s. 6d.; washing and cleaning materials, 1s.; and 6d. for doctor's bill for the children. 

AGRICULTURE
HC Deb 18 March 1942 vol 378 cc1518-628
Brigadier-General Clifton Brown (Newbury)
From my experience, farmers are at last beginning to appreciate the work which members of the Women's Land Army have been doing. They are well trained and are especially good as milkers and in the cow stalls. They are cleaner and better milkers than a great many of the men. In this connection I ask my right hon. Friend to make representations to the appropriate Department in regard to the soap ration. We must have more soap if we are to produce clean milk. The dairies and the clothes of the workers need washing at least once a week, and we cannot have cleanliness without an extra soap ration. I made representations on this subject to the organiser of my local committee, but he told me he had no authority to grant an extra soap allowance. He was unable to tell me to whom I should apply, but, as this was only yesterday, I thought I would raise the matter in to-day's Debate.

MAN-POWER
HC Deb 24 September 1943 vol 392 cc551-678
Mr. Robertson It certainly will be sent to them and to the Secretary of each of the Government Departments concerned. I was in London a few nights ago, staying away from home, and when I opened my bedroom door in the morning to bring in my shoes I found a full-sized guardsman cleaning the buttons of a junior officer's tunic. I had just come from a home where there are no domestics and where 614 they have been doing their own cooking and dish-washing for a long time. That is happening all up and down the country in almost every home, and yet I saw what I have described. It was not a pleasant sight, and I reported it to the Secretary of State for War—it was a little over three weeks ago—and I have not yet received his reply.
On another occasion I was on a golf course at Troon and saw a naval rating carrying a port commander's Clubs, and the same man had been driving the admiral back for lunch every day. Is not that a waste of labour? Does the Minister of Labour investigate these cases? In the same place I discovered a hotel one floor of which was reserved for junior Army officers. Those young men, or many of them, had been having breakfast in bed. To enable this service to go on, as the hotel could no longer provide it, batmen were brought every morning from a village a mile and a half away by motor car, using petrol and tyres. Is not that a waste of labour? These things are going on all over the country.



PRODUCTIVITY OF LABOUR
HC Deb 03 July 1947 vol 439 cc1523-638
Miss Jennie Lee (Cannock)
I am haunted by the feeling that we are not really getting down to this business of work in Great Britain today. I am wondering if we can solve our production problem, if we can keep our homes clean, get the houses built, and the factories and agriculture manned in an atmosphere where all the time on this side of the Committee we are acutely aware of the drudgery and long hours of the past and quite properly our energy goes in the 1567 direction of pressing for shorter hours, better working conditions and better wages. What is going to happen if this tendency increases without some new element coming into the situation? If any Member in any part of the Committee could answer that one, I should like to hear it, because we are being caught badly in Great Britain in a transition stage in which we need more output, but we on this side of the Committee are certainly not going to part with a single piece of the hardly won protection which the working people have procured to better their standards of life.

What I am going to say now may be rather contradictory to that, but I am wondering if we might not have developed two entirely different types of work. First, there would be the work by which we earn our daily bread, and in that work everyone would want hours, conditions and wages to be carefully protected by the best possible trade union rights. At the same time, there would be another type of work in which we would not work for low wages, but where we would learn to work for nothing at all. If we are expecting help in the homes of Britain—I am not talking about luxury help but in terms of where there is illness or children in a home—and if we are expecting all the work of our new hospital service to be done by paid labour at so much an hour, I cannot see where the workers, the money or the resources are to come from. The poison in our society today, which is blinding us to one way out of our difficulties, is that we have got this class division and this atmosphere of patronage from the past.

If we can only have that sort of relationships with which I grew up, where there was plenty of service and help in the home it would point a way to the solution of our ills. In my youth we never lacked servants. We had always assistance in times of need, for under the democracy of a mining village if my mother was ill a neighbour came in and helped. There was happiness and pleasure all round in such service because my mother in turn did not think it an indignity to go next door and get down and scrub her neighbour's floor, bath the babies and do the cooking. We were friends and equals but in society as a whole today we are suffering from a false 1568 gentility and from an historical and economic hangover. The people who were living in bad conditions and who had to do the hardest but the most useful work were despised socially.



Mr. Daggar (Abertillery) 
The right hon. Gentleman the Chancellor of the Exchequer, when he makes his proposals to the House, reminds me of an experience I had last year. I witnessed the cleaning of a motor car by a new product which had been put on the market. When applied to the motor car it produced a surface extremely "shiny, smooth, sleek and slick." I did not know, before I came to this House and heard the statements made by that Liberal renegade, the Chancellor of the 913 Exchequer, why that product was described as "Simoniz." The people in that mining area have not forgotten that this Government found £70,000,000 in order to pay off 3,789 royalty owners—less than 4,000 individuals.  [Mr John Simon 1937-1940]

CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS BILL
HC Deb 21 January 1948 vol 446 cc216-336 216
§ Order for Second Reading read.
Mr. Mallalieu (Huddersfield) 
I am delighted to see in the Bill an attempt to introduce a provision to beat the old practice of putting in the quota time at ten o'clock in the morning by showing a film to an audience of charladies engaged in cleaning the cinema. The Bill provides, at the moment, that for a film to count for quota purposes it must be shown at least once—which means once a day, I imagine—between the hours of five o'clock in the afternoon and ten o'clock at night. That is good as far as it goes, but there still seems to be a loophole. It still seems possible for anybody who wanted to get round the quota provisions to show a film only on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays, 279 and not on Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays or Sundays at all. 


PURCHASE TAX
HC Deb 10 April 1951 vol 486 cc858-61
gaitskill
What I have done, however, is to go through the list and to propose for exemption from tax a fairly large number of the more necessary articles used in every household. These include various kitchen utensils such as pastry boards, rolling pins and pot scourers; a range of dusters and cleaning cloths; wash tubs, ironing boards, and hand-operated 861 wringers; sewing needles, knitting needles, pins, thimbles, and paper patterns; hot water bottles, air cushions and overbed tables; school satchels and shoe laces. Full details of these reliefs will be found in the White Paper. The cost will be £3½ million in a full year and £½ million this year.

Towards the £170 million we have now found £35 million from the Profits Tax and £20 million from these changes in Purchase Tax.



MONOPOLY PRACTICES
HC Deb 15 June 1951 vol 488 cc2689-784
Mr. Williams  [unclear whether domestic or industrial - talk is mainly industrial]
I merely say that it is possible to reduce the price of those things that are controlled by these resale price maintenance agreements, which constitute about one-third of the total retail products of the country. I thought I had tried to make that clear.
Let me give one illustration. It is said that there is on sale in this country a metal cleaning commodity, the charge for which is 1s. 3½d. a tin. The contents of that cleaner are raw petrol and sand, and the total cost of production and resale is, it is estimated, 3½d. I am not saying that by reducing the price of one commodity of that kind we would do very much about the over-all cost of living, but at a time when we are faced with the continued threat of an increasing cost of living the Government ought not to neglect this kind of thing.


SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY
HL Deb 12 June 1952 vol 177 cc120-92
example of clean - agriculture
Lord Wise
I think it is agreed that there has always been a time lag in agriculture as regards the implementation of new scientific methods. Our farmers—I speak in a general sense—are apt to be slow to adopt new methods. It may be that perhaps they are rather conservative; but at any rate they do not attune themselves to new methods and new improvements so quickly, perhaps, as other industrialists do. But I believe that we can say, giving praise to those engaged in agricultural science, that during the last ten or twenty years the industry has made tremendous strides. I remember that in my early days one very well-known society adopted as its motto: "Practice with science." That motto, I believe, is still in vogue. In those early days, however, there was, I think, more practice than science, and it was well known that a small amount of practical experience was better than a whole lot of theory and scientific knowledge, such as it was at that time. But there has been a good deal of co-operation during the last few years, and a record of service has been built up by the agricultural scientists in the interests of the agricultural industry. That is shown by the Agriculture (Poisonous Substances) Bill which has just received the assent of this House. Such things were 124 unheard of not so many years ago. I feel, therefore, that we ought to pay tribute not only to the agricultural scientists but also to those farmers who have seen fit and proper to adopt methods which have been put before them and advocated.

I should like in this connection to mention another matter, as we have just been discussing a Bill which relates to transport. Only this morning I was travelling to London from Norfolk and I came through that very fine tract of British country between King's Lynn and Ely. As your Lordships know, it is an extremely fertile and productive area. During the whole of my journey—and some noble Lords may say that as I was travelling by British Railways no doubt I had plenty of time to look around the countryside—I never once saw a dirty patch of corn. I saw some of the finest corn this country can grow. It was clean. It had been sprayed and there was not a weed to be seen anywhere. That is due not entirely to the farmer but also to the fact that we have introduced into agriculture scientific methods of weed destruction. Later on during the journey, looking out on the Cambridge side, I saw a field of late corn—it was possibly barley—and I could see that by this time next week in that crop there would be a mass of white and yellow weeds. That shows the difference between the use of science in agriculture and the old methods. We have advanced in that direction and I think it is all to the good.

ECONOMIC SITUATION
HC Deb 11 November 1952 vol 507 cc768-903
Mrs. Jean Mann (Coatbridge and Airdrie) 
There have been three attacks from the Government on the cost of living. There is the frontal attack by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the attack that everyone knows about, on the rationed goods. There has been an underground movement, whereby the Ministry of Food have increased, to my knowledge, 95 different items of food and food products, behind the Chancellor's back. Does the Chancellor know of it? I have every item here surveyed and tabled.

There have been 95 items: beverages including chocolate, grapefruit, pineapple, flour products, breakfast foods, bread, cakes, cereals of all kinds, split peas, lentils and dried peas. There have been increases in every kind of tinned goods, all jams, condiments, sweets, confectionery, meat products—I am not referring to the Budget increases, but to increases far greater that have been taking place—herrings, cod, whiting, all kinds of cleaning materials which the housewife usually uses, and all kinds of toilet necessities. I do not specify them all. Then there are candles, matches, fire lighters, paraffin, electricity, gas and, to go a bit wider, newspapers, postage—

§Mr. Emrys Hughes Municipal rates.
§Mrs. Mann Yes, caused by the increase in interest rates in the Budget, which has consequently raised rents also. The list is interminable. This survey was taken by a group of women in the Midlands. It was necessary because in all the Questions I have put to the Ministry of Food I have been referred to the interim cost of living index and, when I go to the Library and study that, it leaves me as wise as before. It is time that we specified every one of the 95 items that have been increased in price since this Government came into power.
I said there was a frontal attack by the Chancellor. There was also an underground movement by decontrolling item after item, as a result of which prices have gone up. And there is a secret service, in that short weight is now permissible. There is short weight in 857 chocolate bars, short weight in soap bars. I noticed that one firm was advertising a decrease in the price of soap. When I weighed their soap it was a quarter of a lb. short in weight. They were selling it, not by weight, but as a bar which had been decreased in price, and the shortage of weight meant that the soap was increased in price. I have letters from housewives telling me that tinned milk is thinner than it was before and that even vinegar is now diluted.

Prices have gone up steadily in spite of all the silly talk—"We have only put on four points whereas the Labour Government put on 12 points." It is like the husband who on being asked, "Do you beat your wife?" answered, "No, I only beat her on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday; her first husband beat her every day of the week." The housewives expected a change—the posters' said, "Time for a change"—but they did not expect the change to be a still further increase in the cost of living.

Is it justified? I say it is in no way justified and I shall quote now from the Economic Bulletin for Europe. 

CANAL ZONE (CONDITIONS)
HC Deb 11 March 1954 vol 524 cc2503-812 2503

Mr. Tom Driberg (Maldon)
The other example that I wish to quote is a much smaller matter. It is an example of the kind of maddening stupidity—at any rate, at first sight; there may conceivably be a rational explanation for it, but I cannot imagine what it could be—that crops up in some units, at a low level; stupidity amounting perhaps almost to petty cruelty.

This constituent is not a Regular soldier, but a National Service man. He has been taking a driving course with No. 3 Driving Training Company, R.A.S.C, Farnborough. He tells me that one of the routine training exercises on this course included draining the sump of the vehicle en route—without pit or ramp, of course—while dressed in battle-dress, and, on occasion, greatcoat, and without overalls. Crawling under the vehicle to do that job obviously makes one's uniform or greatcoat filthy with oil as well as mud. That happens constantly.

After this exercise there is a parade, and those whose greatcoats or uniforms are found to be oil-stained are told that the clothing must be cleaned and that each soldier will be required to pay for the cleaning. On one occasion, at any rate, some of those concerned protested that they could not afford to have their uniforms cleaned, for they had to be sent to a commercial dry-cleaner's; they were told that a sum for cleaning would be deducted from their next pay.

A parade of so-called "offenders" was then held, and the men were marched to a civilian cleaning establishment not far from the camp, where each had to leave his oil-stained clothing; each then had to pay for the work done by the civilian firm. The charge for cleaning an overcoat was 6s. 6d. and there was a similar charge for a battledress.

Is this usual in similar circumstances? I do not know whether the Undersecretary can give me an answer now or not. I will let him have all the particulars, although I have already identified the unit. It ought surely to be possible to issue the men with non-inflammable cleaning spirit, or allow them to buy their own, so that they could do their own cleaning, which would be much more economical. I do 2689 not see why they should have to subsidise civilian firms in this way.

GAS AND ELECTRICITY

HC Deb 09 November 1954 vol 532 cc1044-156 1044
Mr. Joynson-Hicks The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Fuel and Power 

I should like to say a final word on the question of smoke, as there has been a good deal of reference to the amenity of gas and electricity. I am an inveterate enemy of smoke. Smoke in our atmosphere is a very bad thing not only from the health point of view, but from the economic aspect also. From time to time there are all sorts of figures, which are really nothing but guesses, as to the cost to the nation of a smoky atmosphere, but when we think even of the time and money which is wasted in our own households on cleaning and laundering resulting purely from smoke dirt, it makes one wonder why one has not done something about it before.

Gas, coke and electricity are the principal clean fuels in the homes. Twentieth Century civilisation will not be worthy of itself until we have a smokeless atmosphere.


DEBATE ON THE ADDRESS  [shop keepers, closing times, consider public today]

HC Deb 12 November 1956 vol 560 cc570-695
Mrs. Jean Mann (Coatbridge and Airdrie)...
With the advent of the self-service stores this problem is growing in intensity. No longer does the woman buy a 1-lb. bag of rice across the counter at her grocer's after it has been weighed on the scales. The bags are all pre-packed, and the Hodgson Committee points out that there is a fluctuation of up to one-third of 1-lb., which goes under the name of evaporation. The Committee asks the Government to adopt the metric system of weights and measures in order to give the housewife a chance.

I am sorry that the Minister of Labour is not here, because I must again refer to his Report on the Method of Construction and Calculation of the Index of Retail Prices. I have searched through the method of construction to see how a calculation could be made for all those items which I have specified and which fluctuate in weight, size and quantity from day to day. I find that it is not contained in this Report. In paragraph 47, I find that information about the prices of books, newspapers and periodicals is obtained by postal inquiry. Changes in the price of representative proprietary medicines, toilet requisites and cosmetics  —all subject to the fluctuation which I have mentioned— stationers goods, —which are mentioned specifically by the Weights and Measures Report— toys, camera films … are ascertained by correspondence with manufacturers or trade associations. The prices of household soap, soap powder, soapless detergents, soda, polishes, cleaning powders and matches are obtained by postal enquiry from a large and representative sample of retailers on lines similar to those used for clothing and footwear. But the words "similar to clothing and footwear "refer to quality, and who will say that methods similar to those used for clothing and footwear can possibly apply to sugar confectionery, flour confectionery, liquids in bottles, small items in household use in packages and boxes and all the other things which are taken 628 into the homes in packets? It is impossible, and it is because it is impossible that the weights and measures inspectors are crying out for the Government to implement their promise and to introduce this legislation.

This would be comparatively easy to do. I know that the Government have a lot on their plate at present—perhaps rather too much on their plate. I know that even if they pull through the next few weeks or so they will run into economic difficulties. I think we all appreciate that war or threat of war brings in its train economic problems. Probably the cost of living will go up.

Here is one way in which the Government could help over a wide range of household commodities. They could give effect to the Hodgson Committee's recommendation. That would gladden the hearts of all the women's organisations in the country and it would help the trade unions to try to stabilise wage claims. It would be comparatively easy to introduce at least that section of the Report asking for stated weights for the whole of that range of goods. I ask the Government to keep their promise and to introduce such legislation.

ROAD SAFETY BILL
HC Deb 18 June 1965 vol 714 cc1080-140 1080
§Order for Second Reading read.
Mr. Derek Page (King's Lynn)  [expert user makes mistakes]
My right hon. Friend the Minister said that an accused person should be given the option of two or three different types of test. I suggest that this is not sufficient as it stands and that due to the difficulty of being sure that any one test is really accurate and foolproof, it should be mandatory that two or three tests of a different kind should be taken in any one case.

Having worked for years in laboratories, I am well aware how easy it is for a laboratory technician to make a slip. Many bottles used in analysis are deliberately cleaned and dried with alcohol. To 1132 say that it is simple to mix them up is no slur upon the technicians concerned. They would be the first to say that complete objectivity is essential.


Cleaning Fluids    [ other than soap and the unnamed inflammable spirit that the soldiers in Egypt/Canal Zone should have been able to get, this is the first time cleaning fluids have been discussed in their own right]

HC Deb 26 April 1965 vol 711 cc20-1W 20W
§Mr. Fisher asked the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will take steps to ensure that manufacturers of cleaning materials which contain carbon tetrachloride label the bottles in which their products are sold to the public with a warning of their toxic effects.
§Mr. George Thomas Most manufacturers of cleaning fluids containing carbon tetrachloride already attach a label to their products warning the public against inhaling the vapour or using the cleaner in an unventilated space. At the request of my Department, the label also includes 21W advice that the cleaner should be kept out of the reach of children. It has recently come to my right hon. and learned Friend's notice, however, following a newspaper article, that the products of one manufacturer carry no warning labels and the matter is accordingly being taken up with the manufacturers concerned.


Trade Marks Acts

HC Deb 03 August 1961 vol 645 cc1618-9 1618
§3. Mr. J. P. W. Mallalieu asked the President of the Board of Trade what conclusions he has come to in his reconsideration of the difficulties arising from the operation of the Trade Marks Acts; and if he will make a statement.
§Mr. Maudling I understand that the hon. Member is referring to the Answers which I gave to him and to the hon. Member for Huddersfield, West (Mr. Wade) on 11th July. Since then, directors of both companies concerned have expressed to officials of my Department their sense of the importance of avoiding any confusion on the part of the public between their respective products. When discussions are complete, I will write to the hon. Member.
1619 I have given a direction that when an application is made for the registration of a mark for non-alcoholic drinks and some similar foodstuffs a search should be made for similar marks registered for such things as drugs, disinfectants and cleaning materials. The converse will also apply.

§Mr. Mallalieu I thank the right hon. Gentleman very much.


Interesting case regarding Dri-Wash impregnated cloths, tissues and tax. 
http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1961/jul/27/purchase-tax-g-h-linton-co#S5CV0645P0_19610727_HOC_471


Third Schedule.—(PROVISIONS TO BE SUBSTITUTED IN PART I OF SECOND SCHEDULE TO NATIONAL INSURANCE ACT, 1946.)
HC Deb 24 November 1960 vol 630 cc1333-438
Mr. Tom Brown (Ince) 
She buys 2 cwt. of coal, which costs 17s.; she has to pay a small sum to the coalman for carrying the coal up four flights of stairs, and she gives him 3d. Her milk costs 2s. 4d.; her cheese costs 9d.; she has a cut off the outside of a boiled ham, which costs her 6d.; she has ½ lb. of onions, at 5d.; her bread costs her 1s. 11½d.; a quarter of a lb. of tea costs her 1s. 8d.; she has ¼ lb. of stewing beef, at 1s.; ½ lb. of margarine at 8d., and three eggs at 1s. 1½d. In cleaning materials, she spends on soap and soda a total of 6d. The fixed rate for her gas cooker is 4s. 6d., and her electric light bill is 1s. 4d. She buys 2 lb. potatoes, at 8d.; four Oxos at 6d.; ½ lb. of sugar at 3½d.; ¼ lb. of cooked meat, at 10d., and she pays her window cleaner 1s. 2d. every fortnight. In addition, she spends 1s. on medicine. What has she to live on after she has paid for the bare essentials? Hers is only one of many cases I could quote from all over the country. This old lady told me that she spent her pension by Tuesday, and had to wait until Thursday before she received the following week's pension. That sort of thing ought not to happen in these days, when we boast of our increased prosperity and improved standard of living.


CONSUMER PROBLEMS
HL Deb 24 March 1965 vol 264 cc626-720
BARONESS BURTON OF COVENTRY    [Labelling of clothes/carpets]
My second general remark is that I believe care-labelling to be the first priority. I do suggest to the House, and certainly to any woman, that how to take care of what you have bought is more important than what it is made of. There is, naturally, a divergence of opinion on this point; but in many cases content labelling can be misleading and I can assure your Lordships that an acetate satin fabric or dress which could be labelled, "100 per cent. acetate" should be labelled, "Dry clean only"; whereas 636 an acetate jersey fabric or dress (which could also be labelled "100 per cent. acetate") should be, labelled "Warm machine wash". It is hardly necessary to point out that it would not do to do the opposite on particular merchandise. Labels on carpets, I think, should indicate the pile weight and density, rather than the fibre content.  [don't see why carpets should be different, indicate performance and care]


http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1971/jul/07/children-accidental-poisoning#S5CV0820P0_19710707_HOC_583
CHILDREN (ACCIDENTAL POISONING)
HC Deb 07 July 1971 vol 820 cc1479-90 1479
Mr. Alison Perhaps I could go on to refer to the trials that have taken place. The £500,000 that I have mentioned would be additional. I think that it would involve extra cost to introduce a particular kind of safety container for children.
Coming to the idea of experiments and trials to find a particular kind of container, I think it may be of interest to the House to know what has been done in this respect. In a trial carried out in Australia, about 40 per cent. of children aged 4½ were able to open a child-resistant container within five minutes, and the average lime taken with constant urging to open 10 tablets in foil-strip was eight minutes, so I think that we must not underestimate the ingenuity of even the youngest children in reacting to 1486 the challenge presented by an intriguing container which at first defies attempts to open it. They are extremely clever with their little fingers, as most parents know, in getting round devices which are meant to defeat them.

General matters of home safety are, of course, for my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary, but he has advised me that domestic bleaches—and I think that the hon. and learned Member originally had in mind some of the hazards arising from domestic bleaches—are not regarded by his medical advisers as a major toxic hazard, and as far as can be judged from the available information are not often concerned in child poisoning cases. In 1970, for example, out of 12,224 poisoning cases know to the Poisons Information Service, 183 were due to bleach—five adults, and 178 children. Most of the children were aged between one and 2½ years. None died, and the great majority were discharged from hospital after 24 hours.

Following a recommendation made by the Home Office in 1966, manufacturers are voluntarily labelling bleaches to the effect that they should not be mixed with other substances, in view of the risk of the generation of chlorine gas if this is done. In addition, there are warnings to avoid accidents, and advice on the action to be taken should one occur.

As a result of another approach from the Home Office, there is also a longstanding agreement among bleach manufacturers that bleaches shall not be marketed in containers likely to be associated by the public with food and drink. Bottles of bleach should already be appropriately labelled and packaged, therefore, but if this is shown not to be the case in respect of any particular brand, the Home Office will gladly take up the matter with the manufacturer concerned. I have no doubt that the hon. and learned Gentleman would draw to my attention any particular case that he can.

It is often suggested that all household substances, including bleach, should be subject to a statutory labelling requirement. Particularly harmful products are already required by law to bear warning labels of some kind. These controls do not apply to bleaches most of which are based on sodium hypochlorite, not itself a listed poison.

1487 The hon. Gentleman mentioned pesticides. The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food administers what we know as the Pesticides Safety Precautions Scheme, with the help of the Advisory Committee on Pesticides and other Toxic Chemicals. All pesticides cleared under the scheme on sale in this country are labelled by the manufacturers with appropriate warnings and instructions.

As regards the general run of other household products with their varying degrees of toxicity and potential risk there are still difficulties in deciding which of these products should be labelled with a warning of some kind. If every product which might conceivably cause harm to a child were required to bear a warning of some kind, it would probably mean that a very large number of substances in use in the home would have to bear a warning. Any such proliferation of warning labels would ultimately defeat its own ends, as the warnings would tend to lose their impact. If, on the other hand, it was decided to confine the warnings to a selected range of products, chosen because of their toxicity or the frequency with which they were involved in accidental poisonings, there is a possibility that the public might be encouraged to assume that the other products which bore no warning label were completely harmless. The Pharmaceutical Society has pointed out that similar difficulties could apply to the provision of safety containers for medicines unless these were provided across the board; even the comparatively safe analgesics freely available for purchase may be lethal for the young children at risk if taken in quantity. Even with drugs in such containers there could be a false sense of security if they were left in accessible places or the closure was not secure.

Unfortunately, some people just fail to read warning labels, however prominent, and their value can also be lost if harmful substances used in the home are stored in containers other than those in which they are supplied by the manufacturers, or when industrial compounds such as cleaning fluids or concentrated weed-killers which are not normally on sale to the public are brought into the home. Containers such as soft drink bottles, specified by the hon. and learned Gentleman, are often used for the storage of these harmful liquids, the 1488 bottles being unlabelled or, even worse, still bearing their original soft drink labels. This creates a particularly dangerous situation.

In these circumstances, the Government are concerned to promote publicity designed to ensure that all household substances likely to cause harm are kept in a safe place out of the reach of children. The hon. and learned Gentleman touched on the need for publicity of that kind. The Home Office, for example, have made television-filler films on this subject which are shown quite often by the B.B.C. and Independent Television companies in breaks between programmes. The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents promotes frequent national campaigns covering various aspects of safety in the home and these usually include advice on the prevention of poisoning accidents. In addition, the Society produces and stocks a wide range of publicity material including posters and leaflets about accidental poisoning. These are made available to local authorities and local home safety committees throughout the country for use in local home safety campaigns. We understand that very good use is made of the material thus supplied.

Regarding the labelling of medicines, I have explained that there are already powers in the Medicines Act, although I regard this as being largely for the professions and a matter which they take most seriously. Inasmuch as labelling has an educative rôle, responsibility lies with the Health Education Council; but there is one recent professional development to which I should refer. The agreement between the medical and pharmaceutical professions that the medicine dispensed will be identified on the label of the container unless the prescriber indicates to the contrary may not prevent accidental poisoning, but it is likely to assist the speedy and effective treatment of some cases of poisoning. We have, therefore, welcomed the agreement and my Department is studying the implications for the National Health Service of implementing it.

Particularly in respect of medicines, we await the conclusions of researches which may throw up some fundamental pointers to the basic facts and problems involved and specifically to the comparative value of education and packaging.

1489 But I must stress that we continue to look at all the evidence, from whatever source it comes, either home or abroad, and that we appreciate and welcome the concern that has been expressed tonight. This debate has served an important purpose in drawing attention to the real and tragic hazards involved in allowing young children access to dangerous substances.

What we have been talking about in the main have been possible second and third lines of defence; and I hope that nothing which has been said will detract from what I believe to be the first line—or discourage the professional, local government, and voluntary bodies and, incidentally, the manufacturers of proprietary medicines, from continuing to advocate it—namely, the golden rule "Keep all medicines out of the reach of children".

I hope that parents and all who are in touch with young children will recognise the need for constant vigilance in this respect. As a result of all that is being done both nationally and locally, we trust that they will become increasingly aware of the need to keep other household substances, such as bleach, safely out of children's reach.

Young children are active, lively and curious, and it is for the rest of us to recognise this and see that they remain safe. In many ways I think we do. The bodies I have mentioned and parents themselves must be entitled to take credit for the fact that children's deaths from poisonings in this country seem to be low compared with some other developed countries.

I trust we shall keep it that way; and my Department will continue to review 1490 what more can and ought to be done in consultation with those organisations, including in particular the Health Education Council, concerned with home safety and other bodies representative of the pharmaceutical profession and industry.


GOODS (DOUBLE PRICING)

HC Deb 14 April 1972 vol 834 cc1669-80 1669
§ 4.3 p.m.

§Mr. Greville Janner (Leicester, North-West)

I deal first with those which affect every supermarket in the country and nearly all the ordinary household goods that they sell which are subject to the so-called mark-downs or special offers. I have before me the Daily Mirror of Friday of last week containing its excellent and helpful column called "Mirror Shopping Clock". Last week's article was headed Cleaning up on the spring-cleaning", which is a sentiment with which I heartily concur. It shows spring-cleaning items sold by some 10 supermarkets and, in all, about a dozen items. In every case 1670 where there is one the recommended retail price is shown in the first column. But scarcely one single item is sold by one single supermarket at the price allegedly recommended. Woolworth, Tesco, Sainsbury, Pricerite, Pricerite Discount, Key Market, Safeway, the Birmingham Co-op and Finefare are all sellinggoods with an alleged recommended price with cuts ranging from a small amount to as much as 10½p on a a 31½p item.

The items concerned are known to us all: Ajax, Vim, Flash, Windolene, J-cloths, Dettol, Pledge, Mansion oven pads, Dri-Foam cleaners and Brillo. All are household names which should not need to use the sort of promotion relying upon alleged recommended or list prices and then cut-price offers.

The Daily Mirror says in its admirable column: Has the urge hit you yet?"— presumably to do some spring-cleaning. I suggest that the time has come for the Government to do some spring-cleaning in the area of these double-priced, alleged, false cut-price offers.

One does not find them only when going to the shops. One gets them through one's door. Every door in the country receives offers, items and vouchers showing ordinary goods at cut prices. If they are genuine cut prices, more strength to the arm of the manufacturer, more credit to the dealer and more strength to the advertisers. I am not attacking genuine advertising. But if the cut-price offer is not cut-price at all, if the special voucher is for a product which is never sold at the original price, if there is a special pack with a flash across it which never was a large pack but is a smaller pack at a lower price, the housewife is being deliberately hoodwinked.

The object of this debate is to persuade the Government to prevent the hoodwinking of unsuspecting housewives. The sums involved may be small to the Government but they are large to the shopper. It is all very well to say that people must shop around. I cannot see housewives in Leicester, especially those who are out at work, taking an expensive bus ride from supermarket to supermarket in order to get 5p off a large Vim or2½p off a Mansion oven pad. 1671 Where there is a genuine promotion the housewife can benefit from it, but she should know what is genuine and what is not. The trouble about ordinary pricing now is that no one can any longer believe the genuine offers.


Cleaning Fluids

HC Deb 13 January 1975 vol 884 c50W 50W
§Mr. Rooker asked the Secretary of State for Prices and Consumer Protection if any discussions have taken place with manufacturers of cleaning fluids about possible dangers and abuse in the use of these products; and if she will make a statement.
Mr. Alan Williams Many products, including some cleaning fluids, which are safe in normal use can be harmful if their vapours are deliberately inhaled. There have been consultations with some sections of the trade about this dangerous practice and we are seeking the advice of the Health Education Council on ways of discouraging it.

AEROSOLS

HC Deb 31 July 1975 vol 896 cc2420-30 2420
§ 9.58 a.m.

§Mrs. Joyce Butler (Wood Green) Every time I use a hair spray I have a little worry about its possible effect on my health or that of any other members of the family who may be in the vicinity. There is something inherently unnatural about spraying oneself with chemicals, the possible effects of which are not known. Many people feel the same.
[concern for freons affect on ozone layer]

Shoe Cleaning Fluid

HC Deb 13 December 1976 vol 922 c577W 577W
§Mr. Nicholas Winterton asked the Secretary of State for Prices and Consumer Protection how many deaths have resulted from the addiction of sniffing shoe cleaning fluid in each of the last five years; and if he will make a statement.
§Mr. Maclennan I regret that this information is not available. Out of 30 cases of deaths from "sniffing" various products over the past five years known to my Department, four have involved shoe cleaning fluid. A wide range of products can be misused in this way and, as they are not dangerous or harmful in normal use, I do not believe I would be justified in seeking their withdrawal from sale. I fully share the hon. Member's concern about "sniffing", but I am afraid there is no easy solution. My hon. Friend the Minister of State will be writing to him shortly.

AGRICULTURE

HL Deb 27 April 1977 vol 382 cc587-678 [not sure how you'd clean turnips with chems, but sentiment is interesting]
Lord MACKIE of BENSHIE
There are a number of factors in agriculture that we must look at long term. Certainly we want confidence among the farming community, but we also need to look at many of the practices we are now adopting. We in this country are going more and more for monoculture. Open any farming magazine and see the advertisements for new chemicals. Every time a chemist discovers a new chemical he rushes to an experimental plot to see what it will kill. It is an appalling reflection on our care in this country that the proving of new chemicals is still voluntary, and in my view this is a highly dangerous position. There are many cases where practical farmers can show how we need to revise our thoughts in this respect.

For example, if one has the labour to clean turnips by hand, it costs no more than using chemicals and the crop is increased. I think the same can be said of a whole number of products. I am very perturbed about the application of weed killers in horticulture where, with crops like raspberries, which can last for many years, severe residual effects on the soil are already being shown. The reason for this is the agricultural policy of keeping the price down. With the encouragement to greater efficiency, to make any money out of a crop one must use these chemicals, or so the advertisements say. I doubt that very much and we need to look with a great deal more care at this whole sphere.


Hazardous Products (Labelling)
HC Deb 13 April 1981 vol 3 cc1-3
The Minister for Consumer Affairs (Mrs. Sally Oppenheim) 
I agree that the best way to prevent such accidents is by suitable warning labels. 
Mr. Greville Janner As children, who are most affected, cannot read warning labels, would it not be better to proceed with legislation to require the provision of child-resistant containers for those hazardous products?
Mrs. Oppenheim The hon. and learned Gentleman raises an important point to which we have given consideration, but as he will recall—I know his memory is good—the proposals in the EEC directive are that symbols should be used which can be learned by children and which will adequately warn parents. One of the main problems with household products is that most people think that they are safe and keep them under the kitchen sink. The main objective is to warn parents. It is not thought necessary or practicable to use child-proof containers, although that applies to medicinal products.

Dangerous Household Products (Child Safety) Packaging Bill
HC Deb 29 January 1982 vol 16 cc1157-67 1157
§Order for Second Reading read.
Entire article is good - responsibility, appeals from nurses, reasons for putting in other containers
http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1982/jan/29/dangerous-household-products-child#S6CV0016P0_19820129_HOC_78
Many right hon. and hon. Members will be aware that this is something about which I feel so strongly that I introduced a Ten-Minute Bill in 1972, which would have required warning labelling symbols to appear on dangerous household products of this kind, and I produced many examples on that occasion. That Bill was unsuccessful, but, as I announced to the House last year—the hon. Gentleman mentioned this—I now intend introducing very strict regulations during the current Session which will require warning labelling of these dangerous products.

I intend the regulations to cover all products which might present a hazard, particularly to children, with the exception of products such as pesticides which are adequately dealt with elsewhere. I shall return to that point later. The regulatons that I intend to introduce will, in part., implement EEC directives which seek to harmonise legislation on dangerous substances, but I assure the hon, Gentleman that I intend to extend them to cover certain household products which are not covered by the directives.

I firmly believe that the main responsibility for ensuring that children do not swallow dangerous products must, in the first place, rest with the parents, but, as the hon. Gentleman said, it is not a perfect world and they cannot be expected to take this responsibility without the right information and advice as to the dangers involved.


Glue Sniffing
HC Deb 26 October 1982 vol 29 cc1009-18 1009
§Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.—[Mr. Goodlad.
http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1982/oct/26/glue-sniffing#S6CV0029P0_19821026_HOC_696 includes personal experience of smoking anyway, examples of solvent abuse from constituency
after very careful consideration the Government have decided these would not be helpful and might make matters worse. It would not be practicable to apply the stringent restrictions of the Misuse of Drugs Act to the ordinary household products that can be sniffed. Nor, I suggest, would the public accept the inconvenience. Requiring manufacturers to change their products' formulation would not, as my hon. Friend demonstrated, be practicable. Many products that we are now accustomed to using, such as impact adhesives or paint thinners, could not work without their solvent component. Adding an aversive substance may create other risks, as has been found in America, when New York State last year banned the use of the only viable adhesive substance available, when it was found that this substance carried a cancer risk. Warning labels might lead to an increase in solvent abuse rather than alleviate the problem. 
...
it is each individual's responsibility for his or her own health, rather than State intervention, that is the real safeguard against the hazards of glue sniffing.

Children (Accidents)
HC Deb 17 January 1983 vol 35 cc68-70W 68W
CRCs only applicable to medication - gives figures for household product accidents/HASS to emphasise need for them to be standardised too. 
http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/written_answers/1983/jan/17/children-accidents#S6CV0035P0_19830117_CWA_452

Animals: Scientific Procedures
HL Deb 14 July 1983 vol 443 cc946-67 946
Baroness Trumpington My Lords, I take the point made by the noble Lord, Lord Houghton of Sowerby. I give the percentages merely in order to show that from the point of view of the cosmetics industry this is a very small percentage in terms of actual experiments and that they have to carry out these experiments in order to protect themselves before they market new products which could be harmful.
The noble Lord, Lord Beaumont of Whitley, questioned the use of "unnecessary" products. Some of the same arguments I have just put forward apply to other goods which may not seem essential, in that they appear to duplicate existing products. What they offer may be an improvement. They may clean better or be less potentially harmful than other products on the market; or they may work significantly better for some people than available alternatives. Either these products are adequately tested or they fail to come on to the market altogether. That may not be a matter of great concern to your Lordships or to me, but we should not presume that nobody is concerned about it


Solvent Abuse
HC Deb 09 November 1983 vol 48 cc379-94 379
http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1983/nov/09/solvent-abuse#S6CV0048P0_19831109_HOC_348 


http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1985/jan/18/intoxicating-substances-supply-bill#S6CV0071P0_19850118_HOC_70
Intoxicating Substances (Supply) Bill
HC Deb 18 January 1985 vol 71 cc643-87 643
Order for Second Reading read.
Mr. Neville Trotter (Tynemouth)
I must seek to use this unique opportunity to close what I believe to be a glaring loophole in the law. Those who deliberately supply toxic substances to young people for inhalation presently commit no offence. That loophole needs to be closed during this Session of Parliament.
I wish to make it absolutely clear that we are, in fact, talking about what is generally known as glue sniffing, but more accurately as solvent abuse. Three-quarters of the tragic deaths that are known to be due to solvent abuse are caused by solvents other than glue.
Education and counselling are generally agreed to be the right measures rather than seeking to make sniffers into criminals. There is no doubt that the education of young people about the dangers of sniffing is the best prevention possible. 
I praise the BBC schools service which has made an excellent film called "Not to be sniffed at." It was shown in November 1984. ....Parents have a very important role to play in educating their children. Parents themselves also need to be educated about the problem. They have to be told how to recognise the signs of sniffing. They have to realise that far more than glue is involved in sniffing and that many household commodities can be used. In particular, there is great danger from aerosols, and this problem ought to be brought home to parents. 
It has also been suggested that the law should be changed to ban the sale of all solvents to young people. However, there are far too many items for this to be practicable. In general, I believe that it is right to seek the informed co-operation of retailers and to help them to use their own judgment in order to prevent sniffers getting at their addiction
In Scotland, as the House will be aware, there is a separate common law with no English equivalent. There was much publicity about a case two years ago when under Scots common law two brothers in Glasgow were sent to gaol for two years for this infamous activity. They sold crisp packets containing glue for 30p a time to casual sniffers and they sold chronic sniffers two pints at a time for a fiver. The police found gallons of glue in their shop. I stress that we are not talking about normal, responsible 648 shopkeepers. We are talking about a relatively small number of men, but each of them is capable of doing a great deal of harm to young people
Mr. Phillip Oppenheim (Amber Valley
I pay tribute to the British Adhesives and Sealants Association, which has made some effort to produce and distribute a quite reasonable anti-solvent abuse kit to shopkeepers. That has had some effect in my constituency. 
Mr. Colin Moynihan (Lewisham, East) In speaking in strong support of the Bill, I hope that the message that goes out from the House is that the Bill extends much further than glue sniffing, to include all solvents where organic carbon-based substances produce effects similar to alcohol or anaesthetics when their vapour is inhaled, ranging from glues, paints, nail varnish removers, dry cleaning fluids and de-greasing compounds to propellant gases and fuels.
Mr. Alex Carlile The hon. Gentleman may be underestimating the extent of the problem. Glue sniffing is engaged in by many children with no social or educational problems. The stuff is so readily available that children are trying it out in school. The hon. Gentleman says that the Bill is good news for parents. Surely the message that we must send out to parents is that they must not be complacent because we are passing a Bill. They must be ever vigilant and must watch out for this dreadful practice.
We must take care that mass education about the products does not simply encourage more young people to try them. We are in danger of producing do-it-yourself guides to glue sniffing. The education must be selective and responsible.
There are two ways forward. One is in the Bill, which I have the pleasure of sponsoring with my hon. Friend the Member for Tynemouth and which seems to meet the wishes of shopkeepers. A shopkeeper constituent of mine wrote to me a few weeks ago begging for legislation that would cover him in any refusal that he made to people who came to buy solvents. He told me that they would come and bang on his counter and demand solvents and he has no power to say no.

§Mr. Alex Carlile Rubbish.
§Mr. Greenway This is what he has told me.
§Mr. Alex Carlile He can withhold.
§Mr. Greenway He can do so, but he feels that he would be in a better position if he were covered by specific laws, and that is a reasonable point.
§Mr. Robert Kilroy-Silk (Knowsley, North) He must be a weak-kneed man.
§Mr. Greenway No, he is not a weak-kneed man. He is trying to make a living in a difficult area and he has 661 asked for this protection, which is reasonable. People in much cosier circumstances than he ask for protection and get from the House and from local councils.

Mr. Robert Kilroy-Silk (Knowsley, North)The hon. Member for Ealing, North is no more correct to argue that adding additives or aversants to solvents will deal with the problem. Many of the additives pose health risks and often interfere with the acceptability of the product to the legitimate consumer. That applies especially to hair sprays.
Of course we want to encourage manufacturers such as Dunlop and the makers of Evo-Stik to go further in finding additives that will not create problems, but we mislead them and everyone else if we suggest that the problem can be solved by imposing restrictions on sale or by adding aversants. Such action would merely drive young people to just as acceptable—for them—but far more dangerous substances.

We produced guidelines for staff and managers of shops in the hope that this would help those who have a difficult judgment to make when selling products to customers. It is important to know that the retailers have co-operated on this, and the Government have tried to co-ordinate. The advice is written in everyday terms for shop assistants and, for instance, contains a helpful list of signs of a sniffer that would make a sensible, prudent shop assistant wary of selling a product. It says: Watch out for any or all of the following: groups of teenagers standing around counters or areas where glue or other solvent-based products are normally displayed. Frequent purchase of solvent-based products and aerosols by the same individuals. Traces or smell of glue or solvents on a customer's clothes or breath. A drowsy, vacant or glazed expression in the eyes. Unsteadiness, slurred speech or other signs similar to drunkeness. Red eyes, heightened colouring and reddening spots around the mouth and nose. Uncontrolled or excessive giggling or and rowdy/silly behaviour. We should not let too many shop assistants into Prime Minister's Question Time. It continues: Purchase of plastic bags at the same time as glue or other solvent-based products. Obvious absence by a child from school. 682 This was an attempt to put shop assistants on their guard and we relied on the good sense of retailers to distribute it. Similar guidelines were published for managers of shops to alert them to the need to start training and to locate abusable products on the higher shelves, and so on.

Mr. Mellor  A number of hon. Members have commented on the ease with which it still appears that some shops are selling glue to young people in circumstances when they should be on their guard. I hope that that is not the case, but if it is, at the moment they are acting in clear breach of the retailers' undertaking to co-operate with this, and that fact should be made public by anyone who knows about it.

Intoxicating Substances (Supply) Bill

HC Deb 19 April 1985 vol 77 cc527-53 527
§Not amended (in the Standing Committee), considered; reported, without amendment.

9.37 am
§Mr. Neville Trotter (Tynemouth) I beg to move, That the Bill be now read the Third time.
One of the suggestions made to me during the three months since the Second Reading is that there should be dummy containers of the abused products kept in shops. I do not think that that is a practical suggestion. Bearing in mind the wide range of products to which I have referred, it would not be practical for shops to carry on their shelves dummy containers for so many products. I have been in correspondence with my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State for Health and Social Security on the subject, and he is raising the matter with the British Adhesives and Sealants Association and the British Retail Asociation for them to consider. Perhaps some products—glue in particular—might be dealt with in that way, but I do not think it would be practical to treat so many products in the way suggested and to have only dummies on the shelves.
On the one hand, dollops of glue in old crisp bags are sold in kits tragically known as "happy bags"...No reasonable person could suppose that the sale of glue with fish and chips or hot dogs was a normal trading activity. 
For those who deliberately sell glue recklessly and without regard to what it might be used for, the punishment should be gaol or a heavy fine. The Bill provides for a six month gaol sentence or a £2,000 fine. When the Bill was drafted, I wondered whether the House might wish to alter those penalties, but it has not done so. Hon. Members have agreed with my judgment and that of my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department that that is the correct level.
The solvent manufacturers are at present represented by the British Adhesives and Sealants Association. The members of that body are good citizens who are very much concerned about the abuse of some of their products. They have gone to considerable lengths to assist in dealing with the problem, and I understand that they have plans for even greater efforts in the future. The subjects to which they are devoting their attention are the alleviation of the suffering arising from abuse, the education of the public about the dangers, the promotion and support of research into the problems and the dissemination and publication of the results of that research for the benefit of the public. There may also be the endowment of scholarships for the support of relevant research work. The association proposes to increase its activities. I believe that it intends to hold an international conference on the subject next year. The House will congratulate the association on its efforts.

Kilroy Silk - [herion and cocaine are bigger problems but constituents are still concerned with sniffing. Death toll is alarming.] When considering how the Bill will work, it is important to note that 31 per cent. of those deaths were accounted for by the use of cleaning agents, 27 per cent. by the sniffing of glues and 24 per cent. by the inhalation of lighter fuels and the like.


Mr. Harry Greenway (Ealing, North)  I should particularly like to see more glues of the type mentioned by my hon. Friend the Member for Tynemouth as being produced in his constituency, which are solvent-free and therefore not open to any abuse. Dunlop has produced such a glue as well, as has EVODE. I hope that all manufacturers will bend their minds to the production of such glues, because it has been shown that it can be done.

Mr. Mellor  As the hon. Member for Knowsley, North knows, we have been pursuing a range of policies to try to ensure that the dangers of glue sniffing are brought to the attention of parents and children by the provision of a leaflet which can be made available. I can tell the hon. Member for Wallsend that about 500,000 copies of the Health Education Council leaflet have been produced. I shall arrange for some to be sent to the hon. Gentleman. Because we attach importance to local counselling and local efforts, one panel of the leaflet has been left blank so that it can be overprinted by local organisations to give details of local counselling groups or individuals who may be contacted. We are extremely gratified to know that 500,000 copies have been distributed, because that is a major achievement.

A video has been produced by the Central Office of Information. It is entitled "Illusions" and is devoted to glue sniffing. In fact, it has won a prize. It is available to be borrowed and it has been borrowed on about 2,000 occasions for the use mainly of professional people, teachers, youth workers, parents and the like who wish to become acquainted with the problem. A number have also been sold. Again, if anyone wishes to make use of that film, it is available. It is regarded as one of the best information films available, and that is why it won the prize that it did. Its success has encouraged us to ask the same people to produce a similar film to help people who are trying to combat the wider implications of drug abuse in their communities.
Mr. Garrett I have seen the film to which the hon. Gentleman referred, and it is of exceptionally good quality. However, it underplays a very important source of these solvents, which is from industry. There is a lot of petty pilfering of solvents that are used in industry, especially in heavy industry, and it is very difficult to apprehend the pushers. More publicity in this direction would be extremely useful, not necessarily to shopkeepers, but to employers, trade unions and anyone caught taking the stuff away and passing it on to young people.
§Mr. Mellor That is very helpful.


Intoxicating Substances (Supply) Bill
HL Deb 10 May 1985 vol 463 cc875-84

Domestic Accidents

HC Deb 03 March 1989 vol 148 cc341-2W 341W
§Mr. Gordon Brown To ask the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster how many accidents to children occurred in the home in each year since 1978 involving(a) cleaning products, (b) internal glass doors and (c) cookers, excluding hot plates, rings and hobs.
§
Year	Cleaning products	Glass doors1	Cookers
1980	7,000	15,000	3,600
1981	11,500	15,600	3,400
1982	11,300	13,000	2,700
342W
Year	Cleaning products	Glass doors1	Cookers
1983	10,000	13,500	2,400
1984	10,000	15,000	2,400
1985	8,000	12,000	2,600
1986	8,200	9,700	2,400
1987	7,800	9,600	2,400


House of Commons Cleaners
HC Deb 06 April 1989 vol 150 c280W
Keith Vaz asked about biodegradable cleaners in the house of commons
