Elizabeth Shove
comfort and convenience: Temporarilty and practice
in
	The Oxford Handbook of the History of Consumption
	
p289
comfort and convenience not the usual focus of studies and theories of consumption, which is that of acquisition and exchange, rather than use. Conspicuous vs ordinary.

intellectual fashion turning - mundane into view, repositioning of consumption, expansion of debates
(Jukka Gronow and Alan Warde, Ordinary Consumption, 2001)

p290
Crowley  the invention of comfort (book)
self conscious satisfaction with the reatilnship between one's body and its immediate physical environment - Shove defines this as a crucial building block in the making of consumer society. No longer associated with state of mind/caring relationships between people. Physical, "object bound term, donating worldly goods which could enhance mental and physical well-being" (Wim Heijs 'The dependent variable in thermal comfort research: some psychological considerations' in Oseland and Humphreys Thermal Comfort: Past, Present and Future)

p292
Shove summarises that Crowley argues that physically oriented ideas of comfort created problems where none existed, underpinning sets of values that generated and legitimised specific forms of innovation and acquisition. Established need for a range of material arrangemtes. comfort is a key analytic concept in understanding the consumer revolution. 
relation between people and surroundings is more than acquisition. 
instruments of comfort are instrumental in redefining the meaning of concept, and by implication the course of consumer sulture. 

Shove investigate indoor environments and air conditioning, technologies and who decides configuration. Interesting point about relaxation of administrative dress (Singapore govt, UN, Bangladesh) in order to reduce need air condition. 


Convenience
p298
Crowley again - 15th and 16th centuries convenience had strong connotations of harmony and conformity to a civen order. Later referred to open-ended suitability to 'the  performance of some action or to the satisfying of requirements)
1960s - OED first recorded an association between convenience and the use of time. 
(citing Alan wards 'Convenient food: space and timing' British Food Journal 1999

p298
convenience  - reduction in time taken to complete activity or the capacity to rearrange temperal sequence = shifting time. 
modern - foods and stores minimise minutes to cook and shop
hypermodern - freezer, microwaves, ditigal recorders, mobile phones - increased flexibility in scheduling the day
convenience = significant sales pitch
referring to ease of use still exist but why is time such a priority?
precoupations with time reflect progressive erosion of temporaral structures - intensive urbanisation, seasonal ag rhythms given way to new forms of coordination 
multitasking
idea of convenience makes little sense in societies characterised by sting shared temporal rhythms or for people whose timetables are controlled by others. 
increasing pace of society = shortage of time. Southerton "Time famine, time squeeze, the harried leisure class, the search for quality time"

p299
de-routinsiation and speeding up. The more harried we become, the more we value time, the more convenience counts and the more we consume in its name. 
However, focusing on time overlooks complicated relation between convenient solutions and specific practices to which they relate. 

p300
compares convenience food - how is no longer complicated by guilt
washing machines no longer seen as appliance that save time, nor does their use imply substandard performance. 
impossibility of separating concepts of convenience from evolving meaning of care, domesticity and effective performance. 
temporal organisation - washing machines Cowan brief moments of attention, scattered across hours, used often, adds up. 

p303
expectations of comfort are defined and held in place by a mesh of commercial interest and conventions. 
comfort explains demand for material sna dn means that allow people to reproduce a specific relation between the body and its wider environment. 
value of convenience is taken for granted - so long as min standards of performance are not compromised or undermined. Specific goods can signify the lates in comfort or convenience and their acquisition constitutes a form of self expression, but the more import ant point is that discoruces of c&c legitimise patterns of demand that are not driven by conscious choice, decision making or debate, and that are not obvious sites of social display and competition. 









