On Markets and Morality: REvisiting Fred Hirsch

 Luis Francisco Carvalho and Joao Rodrigues, Review of Social exonomy  vol LXIV no 3 Sept 2006 
 
Hirsch - critical analysis of the consequneces of markets on the morla fabirc of society
Inquiry situated in 70’s crises - ecnomic, shortcomings of Keynesianism, report tot he Club of Roe and Sockholm Conference in 1972, environment. report club of rom focuses on distant an uncertain physical limits and overloks the immediate if less apocalypic presence of social limits to growth.
‘Paradox of affluence” - economic growth increasingly delivers individual frustration

economy = material (production of goods / services that can be quantitativel increased without losing quality and with contindued productivity gains) + positional  (individual consumption, influneced by the consumption/fruition of others, that are subject to physical or social scarcity or prone to congestion)

Hirsch - summarised as “”extension of market relations in spite of rhetoric of free choice that usually supports it, hinders some of the individuals most relevant an strategic choices, creating obstacles to the realisation of impt social values, and thus eroding them.  Unavoidable incompleteness in the market provision of goods and serices to the extnet that one is unable to demand non-commodified goods and or the non-commodified goods that are imparotant to our well being. 

‘tyranny of small decisions’ ref to Schelling 1974  - problems of unresticited decentralised individual decision making and about the unpredicalbe and undesired patterns of social interactio that may emergy when indiv have no capacity to coodinate ex-ante their individual actions. choices made by individuals are piecemeal and incremental have a range or time span too small to take all relevant factors into account. 

can the road to a carefree society run through the market economy? The choices offered by market oppotunities are jutly celebrated as liberating for the individual. unfort, individual liberation does not make them liberating for all individuals together. (Hirsch)

commericialisation bias - ‘excessive proprotion of individual activity is channelled through the market so that the commercial secot of our lives is unduly large. 

the expansion of choice through the market presupposes the reinforcement of private property rights that have to be enacted by the spreading of restrictive laws and barriers. Restricions aand barriers are justified by a rhetoric of freedom by freedom seems precisely what is disallowed by this institutional change. The consequence is to threaten those non-market institutions where impt social values may flourish. 

Morality as a scarce resource

Polanyi 1957 - double movement - the market expanded continuously but this movement was met by a countermovement checking the expansion in definite directions

Countermovement emanates from within market social realtions as the outcome of the moral agency of thos most immediatly affecte by the deleterious action of the market... usign protective legislation, restrictive associationa dn othe rinstruments of invention as it s method) 

Fehr and Falk 2002 economics was being increasingly redined as the science of incentives, deriving its strenght from beig able to predict how peopel change their behaviour in repsonse to changes in incentives  - - behavioural economics  An excessive reliance on monetary incentives might have erverse results, oaringating an erosion in individuals intrinsic motiviations 