Home and the family

“This book has been compiled in the beilief that the home deserves to be treated as a central part of contemporary society”	
		This surprises me, this book was printed in 1989 but this was their atttitude? How things have changed, with so much intrusion/ control over home life that occurs now. 
		
“By the 1960s home centreedness and failimiy centred neww were represetned as twin pillars of the privatised style of life of mail affluent workers” Goldthorpe 1969

The home is the family - identified more and more squarly with its phsical location  - home and famiy become interchangeable terms? ? ? OAkley 1976

Making a home is a project undertaken for others. The home as a place of privacy of securty and of creativity. 

p6 security, control and freedom
not answerable to outsiders, home as a castle. But not completely free to act in the home as he or she chooses. household members regulated by other household members

p7home conjurs up images of personal warmth comfort stabilit and security (Watson with Austerberry 1986)  Women remain primarily responsible for teh smooth running of the home and the achievement of orderliness and comfort. 

p10 creativity = moulding physical aspects - DIY gardening 
pride in the home rests in part on it appearing clean and tidy (Roberts 1985) Also an expression of taste.

CROW
The post ware development of the modern domestic ideal
immediate post war - damage, neglect, inadequate. —> dramatic changes - material conditions have improved but changes in organisation of home life have not always been those anticipated. 

Boys et al 1984  on Dudley Report (1944) - housewifes consulation on housing

greater attention to houses equpment - esp bathrooms and kitchens,  Burnett 1986 

Beveridge Report located women firmly in the home (Wilson 1977) 

forms of housing reinforced the nucear family households - not the modernist, collectivist approach. 

1950s shift in housing policy - housing drive replaced by national crusade. Public secot buildings programme - houses build to less generous specs, local authority housing targets reduced in favour of the expaansion ofthe privaate sector. 1950s - encouragement of owner occupation, relaxed restrictionson private renting,  so by the end of the decade housign shortfall was eradicated. New privatised lifestyle.
p21 mid50s shortage of housing in process of being solved - allow greater freedom of choice for ordinary people. Whie the increase of owner occ in the 1950s was dramatic, taken by commentators of the time as part of  more general trend towards and affluent hoe centred lifetstyl enjoyed by homeowner and tenant. home based consumerisem central to this lifestyle, wives and mothers key role in allocation of expentiture. Icreased sales of domestic appliances (reduce drudgery) and tv/ radio (increased leisure time) 76% less well off social groups (manual and lower grade clerical workers,  oaps)  had a TV set by 1961. 

Mogey 1956, Young and Wilmott 1960 - studies comparing housing and home life in old innercity areas with physical conditions and patterns of sociability in new suburban eestates. latter houses larger, better equpped and had gardens. 

p23 rediscovery of povery 1960s - marginalised groups, growig homelessness, insecurty of tenants in cities, scarcity of rented accomodation 

1961 - Parker MOrris Repot 0 Homes for today and tomorrow. 

p35 ROBERTS
The Crescent Estate - mixed development, nothing above 5 floors. 579 flats and maisonettes and 32 houses. 100 persons / acre, approx 1800 on the estate. 

flats have no private outdoor space, apart from a balcomy. 

CRAIK 
p52 Housewife cast as a professional who neeed specailist skills and working conditions. 

Wright - 1973 “the kitechen was the cnetre of the professional phousewife’s world, replacing the parlour as the focus of domesetic guides and women’s magazines. They variously described it as ‘laboratory clean’ ‘tightly consdtucted’ like a ships galley and ‘rationally planned’. comparing its organisation to that of n army barracks or a hospital”

advice to put kitchens at front of house so housewife could look on to street and feel part of it generally not followed - usually at back of house, looking on to garden - child cares. 


Hunt p67 man’s obligatory work takes place elsewhere, so tasks in the house tend to be ones that express their preferences. Chores ten to be one off or irregular.

paid work seems unabildable to him as unpaid domestic work seems to be unavoidable to her. 
tension between publically scrutinised (clean and tidy) and experienced (privately) by house hold as free and easy



