1968
Joan
Bulk Buying


p19 - Boots the Chemist named as store that encourages bulk buying - half gallon bottles washing up detergent, soap flakes in 7lb bags, water softening powder in 7lb bags and a penny in he shilling discount when buying three of any one of the own brand products. [water softening powder - not the chemical name]

p63
stresses soaking in water before washing up, wiping down baths etc after use to simplify proper cleaning
borax, powdered pumice and turps 
avoid scratchy cleansers on the bath, use mild past cleanser or washing up detergnet
venetian blinds - wiped ouve rwith mild soln of soapless household detergent (not close washing determent) then w clean damp cloth

p64 cleaning brass - BRAND NAME recommendation!
long term brass cleaneer such as the one produced by Goddards, which eliminates weely cleaning. Alt you can use th eold fashioned brass poilsh. Badly neglectd brassware can be rubbed over with a rag dipped in soln of spirtis of sals (or hydrochloric acid). Dilute the acid 5 or 6 times with water, being v careful in handling it becuase it is extremely poisonous and corrosive. Rub the brass over taking care to see tha it reaches into the inerstices where the corosion and discolouration are usually the most noticabe. Rind well under running tap, wash with sopay water w old toothbursh, dry well and polish in the usual. 

brick fireplaces = avoid scouring powders, soap powders and block saop almost impossible to remove. Regular scrub w clean hot water. Wher ethe bricks are badly stained use ‘Bricktone’ made specially for the job or a similar preparation to give new colour to the bricks.
 
  65 handbag advice coveres crocodile, snakeskin, lizard, patent leather, suede and plastic/imitation leather, tapestry
  
   p66 meths for cleaning jewelry
   marcacite rubbed with an impregnated silver cleaning cloth
   
    p68-69 metalc brocade - use a tinsel shoe cleaner in powder form. Or make a paste of powdered magnesium or French chalk and carbon tetrachloride; apply and allow to dry completely before brushing off. 
    silver - proprietary cleaner (not named) newest foam cleaners are v convenien for table silver but they may be used to clean other silver eqally well. 
    tortoisehll - jewllers rouge moisten w few dro[ps olive oil
    p70 make a wallpaper cleaning dough with 1.5 tbs white spirit, 3 tbs flour and 1.5tbs water - mix spirt with four as evnly as you can, add water and knead for several minutes. Use dough in long sweeping movements. More expensive but easier is bo buy a special wallpaper cleaning cloth imported from abroad. [very helpful.]
    
  p71   sometimes lenghts are gone to to avoid mentioning brand names - eg soap impregnated steel wool 
p72 “self polishing dressign” which are? 

p73
all about polishes
wide choice of types as well as brands of polish. Not easy to decide which to choose or whether modern furnityre needs polishing at all. 
describes french polish and post war nitrocellulose lacquer and synthetic resin. Ask the shop for advice when you buy. 
p74
when you do have to plish *any* furniture choose a reputable brand. Test i have made showed that paste polishes do not appear to clean a surface as well as liquids and liquids do not clean as well as creams. Aerosols nd paste polishes tent to smear and show marks more easily. Pastes are cheapest to buy and aerosols cost the most. Creams seem to me to be he best and to be he best buy in eveyr way. 
Makers claim that adding silicone to polish makes it easer to apply and helps it to resist liquids better. seems doubtful and in my experience not found any better. the cost more. ever use silicone poish on heavily waxed old furniture or the suface may be permanetly damaged. 

p75 floor polishes - many differend makes of plish to choose from but fortunately for teh shopper only two different ypes. One is spirit-based polish and the oher waterbased. the difficulty arises when mfcrs do not make it clear which types theirs is. 
spirit based - usually blends of waxes in a base of white spirit, usualy made up in paste, sold in round flat tins though some are in liquid form. applied and polished up. 
water based - waxes or plastic suspended in water, nearly always in liquid form. Many give a glss as they dry in about 10-12 mins w/o any rubbing up thoguh they give a better floss if you rub them when they are dry. Referred to as the self polishing type - no meant to clena the floor so should not be usedunless the floor is really clean. 
p76 brands are far less important than types. 
Goddards ‘Take Off’ is one of the preparations which removes heavy polish build ups quicly and easily. 
lots of advice on starch preparation

p84 has tested Lux abd Kudos cause least change of colour (Boots mentioned as retailer of these on p85), Persil Tide and Daz caus the most change.  

p85 liquied detergents of dishwashing and household cleaning include lux liquid, quix, fairy liquid and Sqezy. Flash in powder form is excellent for dirty flors and paint work. 
powders not recommende dfor dishwahsin - harsher on hands and solid particles hat remain undissolved can mark and discolour silver. 
special powders are made for dishwashers and the one recommende by the maker should be used esp while guarantee is in force - rendered voide because unrecommended detergen has been used. 

p89 “jelly type of grease solvent” not named, swarfega?
carbon tetrachloride or benzine, don’t inhale 0 dangers to some people in certain extrememc conditions
household ammonia, borax, methys
benzene (benzol) recommende dfor removing creosite. 
grease solvent
acetone
oxalic acid (which is v poisons so be extra careful) [referred to afterwards, sporadically as the poisonous oxalic acid) 
sodium hydrosulphite sold in the shops as a propreiaty dye-stripper. 1 tsp to 1 pint warm water. 
pemanganate of potash and hydrogen peroxide for mildew remeoval
use amyl acetate for nail varnish removal fro macetate rayons. 

p142-143 household pests, DDT BHC  and pyrethrm mentioned, though no brands
p145 chemists and garden shops sell ready made up wasp killing powders adn liquides. 
p172 childen are killed each year though sampling poisons lef carelessly about the house. 
p174 keep all drugs an dpison in a locke dcupboard. Disinfetanda dn aerosols as well as most propreitary cleansers should be kept well away fro children. . any substance potentially dangerous stored out of reach of small children. throw away old medicinesand ointments. 



Superwoman Shirley Conran
1975
p22-23
Cleaners to buy
min list of 10 household cleaners which save money as well as shelf space
1) household soap in a solid bar or soapflakes
2) biological washingmachine detergent (such as Areiel) use for almost anything thats washed w water and also soak of burnt saucepans
3) cleansing powder which contains bleach (such as Flash)
4) washing up liquid (such as Fairy Liquid) Alt a galon of Tepol concentrate which you can diltue
steel wool scouring pads cut in half
household ammonia
washing soda
household bleach Shop bough household bleashes such as  Brobat area strong mixture of chlorine bleach and disinfectant and should not be usef ofr stain removal. peroxide is a mild bleach (buy 20 vol. 4per cent hydrogen peroxide) 
9) disinfectant such as Dettol [no brackets]
10) a spray oven cleaner such as shift [no brackets]
11) polish for floors and furniture

cleaners to make yourself
requires paraffin, methylated spirits, shellac, turps, vinegar, linseed oil, caustic soda, whitening

p25
recommends Modern Domestic Encyclopaedia by Dorothy V DAvis 

full of brand name reference to products eg Copydex, Ajax, Vim, Cardinal polish, Surf, Alka Selzter, Johnson’s Glory, 1001, Johnson’s aerosol Pledge, Windolene, Perspex Polish No 3 from Habitat, Groom or Valet from Halfords, Rust EAter or Naval Jelly both from Halfords, Calgon, Harpic, shop bought bleach, RB70 from Selfridges, Brasso, Bluebell, Duraglit wadding, Goddard’s anti-wrinkle Smark, spray can of Goddard’s aerosol dry-clean spray, Noval, Steradent false tooth cleaner, Beaucaire, Polystripper, Bob Martin’s Pestroy aerosol, Vapona strip, Kaydee descaler, special ant killer from garden shops

unbranded chemicals - bicarbonate of soda, spirits of salt (v bad stains on lavatory), washing soda, borax, carbon tetrachlroide, salts of lemon, napthalene, camphor tablets, DDT, pyrethrum, 

p35 The kitchen floor: Brush mop or wash. By all means have a sponge mop but you will not, when operating  it, be able to see clearly how dirty the kitch floor is. Again disregard the magic ads on TV. What do you do? Scrub i when it’s dirty like your mother did, but now with Flash, which is the eighth wonder of my world.


Home-Making on a budget
Jo Hatcher
1976

p1 “We have sailed through the disposable sixties and are now up against it in the inflationary seventies. OVerheads and the price of necessities are rising faster than income, so in orger dto keep up your standards a refresher course in economy is a bare necessity.”

p26 
eggs - waterglass - no mention of what this is, how it works or where to get it
p28
under the seciton of what not to buy
lavatory cleaner (bleach is just as good) special window cleaners, 

p56
the loo - use disinfectant in the water when you wash the floor
use leach ti keep the bowl clean and wipe oud the seat & other surfaces wth washing up liq and disinfectant regularly.

laundry - drops it at laundrette

special nappy cleaning powder, don’t use detergents unless you want to spend money on zinc cream for sore bottoms

p57
stain removal chart: does not say where to find these things, or any brand names to look for. This is referred to only in terms of things that need dry cleaning. 
ammonia
borax
carbon tetrachloride
glycerine
hydrogen peroxide
methylated spirits
vinegar

p69 use washing up liq if you run out if family sized shampoo its made of the sme basic ingredients

p54 mentions brillo pads - cut in half as go rusty before you use them again. 