Journal of Consumer Policy V26 (4), 373-496 (2003)


Shove


p399
standardisation of comfort is a narrative of ratchet like path dependency. By redesigning homes and offices for air conditioning, designers have condemned homeworkers and office workers to an air conditioned way of life from which there appears to be no way back. 
Ratchet easel over stretched for it is hard to specify size or number of teeth involved, but in terms of consumption , (p400) it represents the impossibility of backward movement and the locking in of technologies and practices as they move along a path depended trajectory of sociotechnological changed (shove 2003). 

clear commercial interests in constructing and advancing towards a particular vision of mortality. 
p401
to the extent that domestic laundering has a history it is one of establishing and constantly revising expectoration about degrees of whiteness, the precision of ironing, the quality of starching, duration of boiling, the fragrance of freshness and so forht. The types of clothes worn, the number owned, the fabrics made of are central to shaping ideas about that needs washing an when. 

p403
customise process (more than setting machine to run)
Kaufmann 1998 injunctions - personal senses of obligation (in lieu of clear guidance of routine/instruction provided by household manuals)

p405
laundry represented by assembly of cogs, each can turn one way or another but become a system as a whole. some cogs more dominant than others. Some merit in viewing laundry as large (socio)technical system, akin to electrification (Hughes 1983) or the telecoms infrastructure (Fischer 1992)
no obvious system builders of laundry, no key institutions enlisted dn enrolled and no well destined stages of sociotechnical development 
	*I would say that P&G producing schools material/ posters were trying to be systems builders*
	
Shove describes convenience again in terms of time shifting. However, there is nothgin to say that this shouldn't also be streamlining (multipurpose/multisurface cleaners) or certainty (bleach kills and whitens) or safety (no judging chemicals, already measured out). 




Strasser
p377
describing multiplicity - complicated, new ways coexist with old ones. Rich people ought new products before poor people did, people in the city before their country cowsiins and teens before their grandmothers. People who have bought new products also kept some of their old things and maintained some of they told ways. Early 20th C farmers both ordered from the Sears catalogue and bartered eggs at the general store, housewives kept chickens and lit their homes with electrify during the depress fthe 30s, children of the 50s jumped rope and watched television .
significant cultural shifts happen piecemeal. 

p378
consumers may not perceive changes in production and distribution even as they help to make those changes. 
consumers have not changed ways in reposnse to awareness of trends, more often they made practical decisions. 
housewives also lost growing daughters and full time servants, the iceman and vendors who came to the house, the sewing circle and the grow pot women. That isolation, combined with the illusory individualism of consumerism,  intensified the notion that peole could control their private lives at home. 

p382
convenience - became feature advertised as worth paying for (Strasser 1999 pp181-199 Waste and Want)
like efficiency in the factory - save time, reduce wasted effort
concept went further
factory = one best way, never promised freedom from work itself
convenience = liberation
p383
convenience synonym and metaphor for freedom, a form of well-being that product could provide, an amalgam of luxury comfort and emancipation from worries. Much like the satisfaction that consumers were expected to derive from the service offered by the department store. 

p384
freedom from work itself. everybody understood that most tasks could be down with more or less labor. 

p386
Lipovetsky 1994 pp 5, 134-135: obsolescence, seduction and diversification
expand market by suggesting more uses for products - recipe booklesets etc, create year round demand where necessary





p402
market research for unilever: smell currently an important consideration loosely allied to disinfection, despite the waning of miasma-based theories of disease. Nevermind bacteria dirt and sweat washing is also and increaseingly about turning items that are fusty, musty or tired into things that are fresh, scented, fluffy and "ready" to wear. Smell and texture are relevant but as argued elsewhere (shove 2003) freshness is in essence a state of mind: Knowing things are clean people feel good about wearing them. 

(this is ref for her book of same title - comfort cleanliness and convenience) 