Judy Giles
in genfer and consumption
p19
gaze upon clothing and cosmetics [in department store] that might enhance their femininity at the same time as weighing the cost of these against the cost of a labour saving cleaner that could release time for such self fashioning. 
complex calculations were not simply financial: they involved active decisions about self-worth and identity. 

p20
Lord Northcliffe saw female readership as main source of advertising revenue [for the daily Mail]. Concerned aobu competition from Daily Express = Ideal Home Exhibition
p21
concerned to woo the lower middle classes = lucrative market. 
Believed the theme of the 'ideal home' would appeal to their aspirations, anxious to construct a cultural idtentiy for themselves distinct from middle and working classes. (Ryan 1969). 
Home Exhbition and newspapers contributed to the formation of commercial culture of home making = housework is a skilled activity aided by labour saving technologies 

emotionalisation, aetheticisation and professionalisation of housework
Game and Pringle 1984
Partington 1991

p23
Good housekeeping mag offered a new identity to readers hat involved their participation in public forum for rational debate in tandem with their [pratical] home making duties. Issues dealt with in very generalised terms, but the fact that women like Virginia Woolf chose to write for mass produced publication destabilises the newly constructed dividing line between max and high culture. 

GH questions divide between educated women and housewives - not constructed as unintelligent, over acquisitive, apathetic or neurotic as in some accounts. Addressed as someone quietly competent manager of her home, a professional worker, capable of reading and debating controversial issues. Linked to this is her ability to select, buy and use a range of domestic products. Discerning consumer who's competence in consumption and household management determines social status. 

p29
middle class housewives encouraged by magazines like GH to define themselves as rational, balanced, professionals whose interest were not confined to the home. 
DR stephen Taylor in the Lancet castigated lower middle class housewife for making " a fetish of the home. She is aiming at the kind of life successfully led by prople to whom books, theatres and tigns of intellect matter. To them, th home is a necessary part of life, but only a part. To her, because she does not see the rest, the home looks like everything , and she wonders why it does not bring her the happiness it appears to bring them. (p760, 1938)

ideas as this became common in the 40s-60s wen working class aspirations for material commodities were dismissed and condemned as a passive acquisitive materialism in which dangerous ideologies might breed. Deinigrateion of such aspirations enabled middle class housewives to carve new role for themselves as voice of professional homemaking . (British Housewvies League - post war, see Giles 2004 162)

Comercial icon of housewife, beloved of advertisers and manufacturers, did not align itself with the specific needs of any particular class. Instead it proveved eminently flexible, appropriated by mid and working class women often for very different purposes. Cutlrural transitions in relation to consumption engendered new forms of feminine identities, that while classed and differentiated, assign women a crycial place in the history of modernity. 


p21 of her book

bathrooms and indoor toilets enabled new forms of privacy that in turn shaped the ways in which people understood their bodies in relations to others. Bathroom as much s the parlour and suburb could symbolise a whole range of meanings beyond simply denoting a place for washing oneself. 

shift of tocnsumerist economy from 1880s onwards. Sense of the modern as closely linked to getting and spending, was also aligned to visions of the 'good life' and time to enjoy this.

p22
invasion of private sphere - health visitors etc and as the definition of the ;efficient' housewife was extended to the working classes

p62
Men were encouraged to see the garden as their particular domestic domain. 1934 survey of households in merseyside  claimed that 3 x as many men as women identified gardening as one of their leisure activities. Gardening made respectable cityzens. A way of keeping men out of the pub and in the home. 
p63
funds to encourage gardening on municipal estates were donated by benefactors (e.g. Cadbury, Rowntrees), Birmingham City Council gave free gardening calendars to all tenants. Vegetable growing gernarlly seen as husbands, wives flowerbeds, gardening was often a shared interest that contributed to the family's economy at the same time as enhancing external appearance of the home. 

gardens and alootemnet offered men a space in which they might contribute to ht family's well being without quite the same associations of femininity that attached to cooking and cleaning. 
focus for marital companionship, shared enterprise 
rural  illusion provided by a garden as well as privacy and demarcation of fence
emerging symbolic forms of privacy such as the garden fence were often derided as creating divisions between neighbours. 

p67
'Moderns' like Woolf say in domestic service a symbol of all that was bad about the past, demise heralded the start of a modern age that wouldd rid itself of Victorian stuffiness and limiting conventions .

p123
GH mag providing a forum for women in which rational debates of public concern are carried out alongside provision of domestic advice and info. The magazine locates itself firmly in the public realm - Harbermas - that ideally exists bewenn  individual and state interests.
Whether such a sphere is possible given the competing interest of increasingly fractionalised groups in the C20 is not the issue I want to disucs. but point out as Nancy Fraser and Lynn Spigel have done that Habermas' public sphere has historically always been a space reserved for certain privileged sections of society. Spigel comments 'women, the working class and poc were not typically included int he ideal public sphere of Habermas' imagination'. Women addressed by GH assumed to be white and middle class. 

p133
adverts one of the few cultural spaces women were addressed as housewives and workers. 
Mansion Polish - one tin must do the job of two  less time for housework, quikcnes sand ease is helping many thoughseand of busy War Workers to keep their homes bright and healthy. 
advertisers drew heavily on the vocal of war to construct the housewife as a figure of national importsnce. Moths a nationl menace use mothaks and save your clothes coupons. alongside ad for range of commodities is a reminder form the Min of Fuel and Power that 'int he battle for fuel.. no economy is too small to count.'
housewives addressed as having essential part in securing nation's future through careful management of family's health and well begin as well as in her consumption of domestic commodities. 