LSBU

Battersea training college

BCE/4/2/4 - cooking lessons
Kitchen set up
How to Wash Up - soda,  soap,  (both plain jars) wisk, tide, dreft, sylvan - apparently there is a diagram, not visible here, to explain how to stack the dishes before washing them.
Preparing to Wash Up - Izal, Scouring, dettol?
Hygiene in washing up - petri dishes - can't see but am assuming that these have bacterial colonies from different stages of the washing up cycle, or perhaps areas of the kitchen. 

Posters mainly home made - how to cook cabbage, how to cover a fruit pie, how to shape sausage rolls (plus all the how to wash up ones - no evidence of corporately produced and distributed ones) 

Saw this one with the preseves in it yesterday too - the bottle is Methylated spirits (very large, looks quite unweildy. Cork stopper? Chemical House. 

Needlework does not seem to cover fabrics, or laundry (stain removal). 

Teaching in schools - nice one of cleaning metals
learning about some of the different types of metals that might be encountered in the home. There is a tub of Mammoth scouring powder and a tin of knife powder on the table, all neatly set up to demonstrate. Children sitting in a circle around the demonstration area, no sign that they might be partiicpating, although they're all wearing aprons, so might do. 


The Battersea Polytechnica
a record of twn years 1894 - 1904    (BCE/3/5)
Training school of domestic economy opened Feb 1894
fee started at 4 terms for £21
raised to £55

full course includes cookery, needlework, dressmaking, laundrywork and housewifery, with Chemistry of Food and laundry processes, hygeine and physiology, first aid and sick nursing, theroy and practice of education, blackboard drawing and voice production. Can enter for single subjects, provision made for special courses in Colonial and gneral home traiing. 

examinations handed over to national union of training schools. 

photo of practical houseiwfery class in a large room - no sign of any appliances beond brushes and cloths (though there are large boxes for carrying equpment) 




letters from students who have dispersed to live in other countries are interesting
Battersea domestic science guild magazine 1972
p19 Mary Inkpen Awassa Ethiopia
"we don't do much laundry work here as there sis a shortage of water in many areas and anyway most of the women wear skins. The children wear nothing@ The skins are not prperly cured and the women rub them with butter to make the soft . You can imagine how the dust sticks to this greasy surface. Any ideas on cleanking skins in this condition? I have found that the vermin can be smoked out but thegrime remains. 

Austiran volunteer and I did local reserach to find natural soaps - yellow berries which make excellent detergent. Practising making soap frm white ash from the burnt stem of banana palms and oils form sesame and sunflower. 



making own soap in India
1936 (writing in 1978) caustic soda available - oils were gheap and plentlful. coconut oil had hard white toilet soip, sweet oils made laundry soap - 



Manor Houser MAgazine  1955-1956
March 17 56
Mary Inkppen p30
writing from Africa = ashes and lemon are used to clean brass and coppery. Washed grit is used as an abrasive to clean dirty sinks and pans. What money we wate on commercia cleaners in England! 