The Secret of Scent
Luca Turin

Jeyes Fluid 47-48
Smell habits are long lasting - only just eerged rom the Phenolic Age of Jeyes Fluid and Wright’s coal tar soap as staples of antisepsis in public places and schools. The British in particular love the bracing institutional smell of phenol. 

soap powder 27, 
if you are allergic to hydroxycitronellal which is everywhere and smells of lily of the valley... 
3 possibilities - ban fragrances - unfragranced products smell bad
ban or restrict offending chemicas - in dues course they will be replaced by other bulk ones, likely to be just as allergenic.  or 
label the bottle proeperly so people know that if they are allergic to somethign, they can stay away from it. A lot of the porducts concerned as supposed to be good for you, so would not agree with a nasty EU allergen label on the bottle. 

Environmental pollution - soap powder is one of the harshest environments to put fragrance in. As a result the fragrance materials have to be rugged - tough enugh to resist biodegratdation. Coupled with the fact that hundreds of tons of these materials are washed down the drain each year, and analytical techniques get better aand better, you have a predictable result: moleculesrdetected in  fish, milk and allmanner of places where they definitely shouldn’t be. Best solution is to create molecules that are less stable and morepowerful, so fewer are needed but can still make it through the roller coasterr ride of washing machine and tumble dryer. 

59 muguets are big business, because if you start from hydroxycitronellala dn turn down the rose, the sweet and the green until the whole smell goes barely off-white, stopping just short of the snowy, blinding aldehydic character you have what everyone calls ‘fresh’. And fresh is the most desirable character of all in the engine room of perfumery - o called functional fragrance. This goes into everything you use rather than wera. More often than not, it simply covers the smell of the ingredients that do the job. 

naturals 12  - complex rich smells. Not cheap, variable quality.
functional 13-14, It is a credit to their genious that many household things smell good, and some of the ideas in functional perfumery trickle up to fine fragrane rather than the other way around. Some functional perfumes are true works of art: I would pay real money for a botle of the 1972 fabric softener Stergne, which smelled sensational. 

chemical words 25 
people react baly to the word chemical - allergies on the increase and unspecified hemicals are resonsible. 

Natual esenses will make you come out in a rash as often as synthetic ones. The EU has published a list of 26 allergens which it intends to restrict in use. Most are high volume matierals - things to which a lot of people have been exposed to for a lot of the time. Allergins list is in part due to statistical effect - quorom of people with particular allergy before dermatoligists notice it. 
p26 people read labels and find things like “Hyroxymethylpentylcyclohexene carboxaldehyde aka Lyral an excellent and largely harmless lily of the valley synthetic. Notion of nature knows best is so firmly entrenched in everyone’s mind that fragrance industry has given up explaining itself before it  even tries. Fragrance world has been coy about chemical origins virtually since it started. Add to the fact detection of chemicals where they shouldn’t be and you have a recipe for mass rejection of chemicals by the public. 


