Martens and Scott
Unbearable lightness of cleaning
abs p379
1951-1961 "pride in domestic practice" "the women's lobby speaks in a uniform voice about tasks of th hw and purpose of cleaning"
1971 - 1981 "domestic dreaming" dream about the potentials of a transformed consumer council
1981 (to some extent) modern advising in a late modern world - new role modern advisor of cleaning products and practices within context of complex world

see also - Ger and Yenicoglu

p380
Gronow and Warde 2001, 4 "practices of [ordinary consumption] that have become so mundane, so taken for granted, so normal, that most people including scholars, fail to appreciate their significance"

p381
vigourous debate on historical cleanliness and hygiene. 

Modernity and growth of consumer society, changes manifest in cleanliness practices, associated with germ theory. 
McClary 1980
Bushman and Bushman 88
vinikas 92
Tomes 98
sivulka 2000

 
 Tomes - turn of C20 growing awareness that germs passed between human beings, through behaviours. Germs domesticated. 
 dev of home ec and other sim offered opportunities for middle class women with scientific ed to make a living  - crucial to this idea of domesticating germs and getting word out. (Attar 1990)
 
development of public utilities infrastructure (electrification, gasification, water) and decline of domestic service (Palmer 1989, Hopwood 1997)

home ec, feminist and magazines debated the efficiency of domestic work. Shared common vision about role and purpose of women in domestic sphere. Raised profile of domestic work during interwar period. 
Efficiency relief on new commodities - daily brush / scrub of toilets with disinfectant powder. 

p382
growth of advice literature also part of consumer culture
not just efficiency/ease and germs:
Tomes - mid C20 germ awareness declining in cultural prominence, standards of leanness symbolically increasingly associated with a domestic sphere that look dn smelled good.  (appearance - making home welcoming and cosy)
efficiency was about perfecting the housewifely role, attain higher standards of cleanliness. 

declining skill of housewife, 
Matthews 1987
Roberts 1995
Robinson and Milkie 1998
decline in domestic cleaning Hoy 1997
see also Bird 1979
Cross 2000


commerce does not take over from domestic practitioners 
		the culture of domestic caring operates a s a limiting force on the unfettered adoption of new products into the domesticc sphere  (?)
		
p383
post war years - another phase of commecial incursions implicating domesticc practices (silva 2000 and Shove 2003)

Magazines as subjects of Scholarly interest
White 1970
Gerguson 1983
Winship 1987
Beetham 1996
Beetham and Boardman

development and character of consumer culture
Winship 1987
Scanlon 1995
Ohmann 1996

GHK in particular
White 1970
Horwood 1997

p385
1951 and 1961 - cleaning work should be made as easy as possible
- routinisations
- adoption of appliances and products
without having to stop and think

p386
perfectly easily be maintained in a daily routine, that will not only keep your home fresh and gay but a safe and sure place for the family to grow up in (1961 Apri lSupplement)

language of ease
 incorporated into product names. 
 Kleenof - oven cleaner, all about ease, common among producers of cleaning products (note 16)
 
 p387
 deliberation about advertisers gaining greater influence on magazine content as 60s progressed. Not appear to be relevant to GHK, long lasting relationships with advertising
 
 products also portrayed as actually doing the work for you (not just making it easier) - e.g. paragon, harpic - product does the work
 smooth modern surfaces 0 find notion that products may replace practices altogether
 
 1961 - floor covering Hardura, not require any cleaning, 1971, self cleaning ovens, air extractor fans to make kitchen self cleaning.   Thisreally speaks to the reduction in work found in the version of ease that negates care. 
 
 1971 GH - (p76)  not give advice on the routine to use, but which products to choose. Choice of products = difficult choice for the needs of households "depends not just on what you can afford but on the way your home is furnished and on your individual needs".
 
 p388 feeds into task of shopping for the domestic sphere
 
 compares the small b&w pics in 51, 61 to latge colour photos of idealised dream kitchens 71, 81
 gospel of germs on the wane, kept alive mainly by marketers of domestic commodities. note 17 
 germ warfare infused with notions about appearance and smell. 
 how was she to know her work was effective
 fixated on showing that germs were killed - frequency appearnad and smell - exacting levels of cleanliness. 
 routinsed domestic work that emphasised good appearance and smell became the end in itself. 
 discourse around disinfectants - clean odour indicates that the desired spots have been reached. 
 presence of a formidable chemical odour
 expressed earnestness through this, others had adopted more pleasant floral smells - Jeypine 1951 suggested that its smell won over housewives
 
 p389
 "germs breed even in the best-kept homes, but not where Jeypine is used! Jeypine destroys germs anywhere and always. It is powerful yet pleasant. Indeed that special Jeypine fragrance is one of the chief reasons why so many households prefer Jeypine for domestic disinfection... Let Jeypine pleasantly protect your home"( GH 1951 August p26)
  
 p390
Killing germs and getting rid of nasty smells was not enough! 
 Parazone ad 1951 - suggests suppressed concern with health and germs, the priority of the appearance of clean
 
 placed housewifely skill on a pedestal, developed uniform message, optimistic about the products of modernity that purportedly solved domestic problems. 
 
 p392
 advertising in 50s and 60s took form of practical product information - as affluence increased, domestic space was saturated with consumer desirables and consumer aspirations shifted. 1971- 81 - no longer interested in basic info, fantastical, and special. Health dangers became distant memory, so inspired by sensory representation of domestic space, moved away form cold sterility of modern interior.
 
 Young children particularly at risk in homes 
 "Safety safety safety for small fry" Horrendous list of accidents 
 kitchens described as workshops, not playrooms and children should not be left alone in them (GH 61, Sep, 41)
1981-201 new dangers make appearance
 March 1981 - Judith Cook on dangers of weedkillers and insecticides. potential halt dangers, routine use. 
 1981 more coverage of green issues. 
 
 p393
 80 years of advice feature
 1922 window cleaning - paraffin to keep rid of the flies
 2002 weak vinegar solution if paraffin is not in the kitchen cupboard, though not deter flies. Also offers Windowlene as good results. Example of product/practice variety shows how GH avoids prescribing one specific option. Illustrates complexities in late modern domestic life, harking back to old practices of past times; they are more environmentally friendly because chemically less complex and they offer less chance of bodily health harm [ paraffin is pretty dangerous]
 
 editorials - confer sense of increasing complexity, both in domestic product world and more generally of increasing variety, diff suppliers selling similar item but diff prices, 
 
 p394
 of tech developments altering once familiar products, introducing radically new ones that require diff modes of operation and maintenance. 
 
 offers contradictory advice and content - modern cleaning solutions developed in early 20C to ensure good health as germ killers are in post war years described as dangerous chemicals in their own right, risky to children. In later years, these same chemicals come to pollute the env. 
 
 1981 - questions producer of Vapona Flykiller on safety, their product is advertised in the magazine. 
 
 dream kitchen 1991 displays tray of eggs on kitchen surface, common in other adverts - hygienists would have them stored in the fridge. 
 
 p395
 clearly not gone all the way in criticism of dubious household products. Discusses contemporary danger wo questioning earlier recommendations, does not suggest that identified dangers should lead to the rejection f offending products. 
 Impressed by modern invention = unable to resort to complete criticism. 
 Reflects contraction between ed and commercial input. Different types of reader, those who share its celebration of the modern and those who are more sceptical. 
 
 during the 60s GH stopped prescribing specific manner of doing domestic work. Decline in adverts for cleaning products, clear that housewifely task of cleaning had a low profile in the mag for a while - shift from practical aspects of maintenance to fantastic potential of aesthetics
 
 immaculate cleanliness radiates from the pages, but left in the dark as how to achieve this. 
 1990s saw a return of sorts in the discussion of cleaning in the mag. 
 
 silencing the kind of cleaning characteristic of post war years, supports general change toward value imbued in objects that form a households material culture. Associated w changes in consumer culture. [think about metal polish? and the tie in with objects that required polishing?]
 silencing of cleaning (as opposed to shopping and assembling an environment) conducive to transfermation of culture characterised by dispesibaility (not durability) and by proliferation (scarcity). 
 
 caring still high on the agenda - deVault 1991 *Feeding the family* book
 
 
 whiteness/brightness - othering, symbolic meaning of clean
 Linde-Laursen 1993   Nationalisation of trivialities: how cleaning becomes an identity market in the encounter of swedes and Danes. *Ethos 58 (3-4_ 275-84*
 
 Saugeres 2000 Of tidy gardens and clean houses: Housing officers as agents of social control *geoforum* 31 (4) 587-99
 
 
 readership GH - 76%  were B C1 and C2 in 1984
 
 
 

 