Modern Household Encyclopaedia

1954 Jessie de both

p1
acetic acid - colourless biting acid in vinegar but also made commercially and used in the household to remove stains, also used in candy making

acid  or alkali burns - referred to as chemical burns. Rapid removal of clothing soaked with the chemical causing the burn. Immediately wash burned areas with large quantities of water, pref not too cold. After chem is thoroughly washed off, over with vaseline, boracic ointment. see doctor.
if die to carbolic acid (phenol) first wash burn with rubbing alcohol instead of water
if burn is in the due due to cement, lime or battery fluid, have patient lie down, keep eye open nd gently pour cup after cup of water into the inner corner of eye and let water run to outer side. 

p2
acid or alkali poisons, 0 mild - give baking soda, or vinegar

acid stains - quick attn or fabric damaged. few drops of mild ammonia son or dry baking soda rubbed on both sides of spot. moisten with water when bubbling ceases sponge or rinse with cold water. 

adhesive tape - remove from artificial or synthetic fabrics apply ctc, kerosene or benzol

p3 
alkali stains - did too - remove by applying lemon jiuc, vinegar, oxalic acid soon or mild solution of acidic ace follow with cold water rinse. Latter 2 must not be used on fabrics made of artificial fibres. 

p16 baking soda - baking uses.... as a cleansing agent excellent for cleaning ref rig and every type of food container

p26
Bleaches 0 sunlight is natures bleach. When using commercial bleaches follow directions. 
borax - 
chlrine solution, commercial belaches
Javelle water (washing soda, water, chloride of lime)
lemon juice (citric acid not mentioned) 
oxalic  POISON be sure bottle is labelled poison and kept out of the reach of children. Always wash hands thoroughly after using. Dssolve 1 tsp of acid crystals in 1 cup hot water, apply with medicine dropper do not allow to dry, rinse immediately
hydrogen peroxide, add few drops of apponia to increase speed of action
potassium permanganate - dissolve 1 tsp crystals in 2 cups water, keep in safe place and marked POISON apply with medicine dropper; follow with oxalic acid (POISON) to remove resulting purple brown stain, rinse immediately
sodium hydrosulphite - purchased commercially under a gaiety of names, most commonly as colour or dye removers. also avoialbe as a powder -  - moisten finger, work it over th estain with finger, or make solution of 1 tsp to 1 cup water and immerse the stun. Do not store soon but make it fresh each time. Keep powder in tightly closed can or snugly corked bottle. 
p27
sodium perborate - mix 4 tbs to 1 pint luke warm water, sponge on fresh stains and rinse, or stretch stain dampened with water over a bowl of hot water and dust on the powder and let stand 1-2 mins before rinsing. 
1 level tsp to 1 pint hydrogen peroxide - use immediately
sodium thiosulphat - known as photographers hypo, use with or after Javelle water to remove chlorine from cloth. Make at hime by combining 0.25 oz sodium thiosulphate, 1/8 oz 36% acetic acid and 2 quarts water. useful in removing iodine satnes
tartaric acid - 

p30
borax water softener, cleansing agent, eradicate cockroaches, protect from moths, and bleaching agent

p65 chocolate stains
borax
salts of leon
javelle water or hydrogen peroxide
or potassium permanganate
non washable fabrics with carbon tetrachloride. 

p86-87 clean cut glass old toothbrush dipped in hot soapy water to which a few drops of ammonia have been added.  illustration of this, with corked bottle of household ammonia shown plus skull and crossbones on its label.

p94 dry cleaning - unless abs necessary, do not do at home. Dangersou and professional usual does a better job. 
To clean a ight suit in an emergeency, rub with dry bran
in using liquid commercial dry cleaners, choose a dry day, do the work outdoors, do not rub hard as friction may cause fire. Dry garment in the air. 

p110
fire extinguishers - goes through classes of fires - ctc mentioned as not needing protection from freezing, must be kept filled , best refilled by manufacture, keep ctc in kitchen, after using ctc be sure to ventilate rooms thoroughly as fumes turn to poison gas when heated and confide. ctc good for electrical fires too. 
fire prevnetions - in using in flammable cleaning fluids such as benzine, gasoline, naphtha dn paint remover exert the greets caution indoors, be sure there are no flames in stove, cigars, cigarettes or canldes tha tight ignighte the gases which they give off. Clean as many things as poss outside. 

p154
ink stains 
from books - dilute a little oxalic acid (POISON)  apply, remove
wood - rub sigh sweet spirits of nitre
materials and clothing - cover with iodine, then sodium thiosulphate and ammonia, or ctc, or benzene; alcohol may be used by ton on rayon. 
printing and mimeographing inks removed from rayon by ctc and lard, or valeine, or from silk wool cotton and linen by denatured alcohol, kerosene or benzene (INFLAMMABLE) 

IRON BASE OR FOUNTAIN PEN INK SPOTS MAY BE REMOVED FROM WHITE WASHABLE MATERIAL BY APPLYIN OXALIC ACID )POISON)  and following quickly with application of baking soda or ammonia, immediate rinsing. 
p263 silver nitrate stains - hypo

p272
know stain removers
solvents - grease solvents are used on greasy stains, depending on fabric - inc alcohol, ctc, acetone, gasoline, naphtha, turps, kerosene and glycerin, as most of these catch fire easily they should be used out of doors or in a well ventilated room where these is no fire, nor burning cigar or cigarette, banana oil or amyl acetate as it is sometimes called is another inflammable liquid used in stain removal. 

pepsin powder a stain soften may be purchased at the drug store - freq softens one stains, esp those containing albumin, even after they have set. dampen, sprinkle, no soap or other alkali, let stand and keep moist (does not say this is an enzyme) 


----------
1947 

poisons - 
same as 1957?
barium
bichloride of merc/corrosibe sublime
bismuth
blue vitriol/copper sulphate
borax
creosote
ether
formaldehyde
heroin (see codiene)
lime/quicklime
lobelia
lye
silver nitrate
phosphorous - match tops
washing soda


introduction - this first cenc household hints
lot of info about product, methods and ideas... 
new products made form recently discovered chemical formulas appear in greater now to help maintain good health , to simplify keeping the house clean for washing and cleaning clothes and to rid the household of pests. 
Some of the drugs and chemicals  recommended for stains cleaning or for othe repurposes, may be prohibited from sale by law in some sections, there it is necessary to employ alternative hints. 



The Home-Lovers encyclopedia
(no date but internet search reveals that it was published/republished in the 1930s) 

p869
preparations of benzine although labelled improved or non-inflammabel still require care in use and should not be applied near a naked light. The article treated should be aired by an open window until the smell of cleansing ghas disappeared. 
p870 ink - moisten, place a tiny pinch of salts of lemon over the stain. The latter must be carefully handled as they are  poisonous. 

the use of the word pinch is interesting here, as it is a very tactile word - a pinch is something you do with your fingers, which then contradicts the handle carefully statement


