Mrs B 1928

hints to housewives
no adverts at front or back, but quite a few mentions of new domestic technologies, such as electrically operated polishers, and washing machines, different ovens. 

oldest industry = housekeeping

blankets - to clean
2 tbs borax or a little lump of ammonia in a pint of soft water, then add to warm soapy water. Most washing machines are suitable for blankets

bleaching clothes
allow to cool with soap still in them then laid out to bleach on the grass for several hours.

blood stains
water plus salt then wash with washing soap add bleaching soon if stain is old

brass p36
good metal polish (no brands mentioned in the text here)

bronzes p40
muriatic acid

brushes p41
piece of soda the size of a walnut or few drops of ammonia

ceilings to clean p54
washing soda ordinary - never use soap. 

chimney on fire p59
common salt

closed range to clean  p60
after cleaning away soot, sweep out and wash with hot water and soda to remove grease. Perfectly dry before applying blacklead, which will produce a brilliant shine if moistened with turps the steel mouldings should be cleaned with paraffin and emery powder or when badly stained with vinegar and bath brick. 

damp in cupboards p75
box of quicklime will absorb

damp stains on linen - rubbed w finely powdered chalk. 

disinfectants - p86
1) wc, stationary tubs and basins, bath tubs and drain pipes
hot water  2.5gallons
copperas    4lb
carbolic acid 4oz
p87
2) for swell pails - chloride of lime then rinse after a few hours
3) for cesspools, overflow and privies, dry coperas or chloride of lime by he shovelful
4) disinfecing banages, poultice cloths
carbolic acid 4 oz
hot water 1 gallon
soak for 12 hrs, then wash and only use for the same case, burn afterwards
5) for washing bed and body clothing in infectious disease
sulphate of zinc 2.5oz
carbolic acid 4 oz
hot water 1 gallon

fire what to do in case of p108
keep buckets of sand or water on each floor. Patent fire extinguishers are invaluable and not expensive. 

[more serious chemical use seems to be for cosmetics and health care e.g. chilblains = hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid, camphor water deadly poison not apply to broken chilblains;, freckles= dilute solns mercury, sub nitrate of bismuth and carbonate of soda or carbonate of potash, tincture of benzoin, gnat bits - chloroform and eau de cologne to make a paste of violet powder]

p143 clean a gas stove
at least once a week thoroughly clem wit hot water soap and a little bath-brick or gritty substance. . Boil badly encrusted burners in strong washing soda. 

p145 clean kid gloves
white - slightly soilted - cream of tartar rub with
really soiled - flannel dipped in benzine and allowed to be come nearly dry is better. After the application of benzine rubb with breadcrumbs unil all stuns and dirt removed. Refined petrol is also good. 
p146 suede gloves - fullers earth/ dry pipeclay if white or benzine
light kid gloves -- yellow soap, milk
chamois leather - soap suds plus ammonia, 

p165 ink stains from fabric - salt and milk
in linen - dip in hot water, then spread smoothly over a basin or the back of a spoon, ffew drops of oxalic acid or salts of sorel, rubbing and rinsing in cold water until stain is removed. 

p185
linen - to bleach
0.25 lb chloride of lime and 1 quart soft water, keep bottle closely corked, dilute what is required.
p186 after treatment with this solution, the linen should be rinsed in strong soon of ammonia and water then washed n clean water. 

p190 Mackintosh - to clean
cold soft water, scrub with yellow soap, rinse. a little soda. 
about a tsp acetic acid to each 2 gallons of the last water will set and revive the colour of the fabric. Hang it to dry. Paint or grease spots removed by eucaliyts oil. Become hard and ridged, cleaned with lime and water Handful of best grey lime should be dissolved in 0.5 bucketful of water and mixture applied to stiffened parts by a piece of sponge

p191 marble
very discoloured, soft soap quicklime and caustic potash in equal parts, apply with a brush and wipe off after several days. 

p229-231 poisons
acetic acid
alkalies - potash soda ammonia taken as pearl ashes soap lees, soda and ammonia in vapour solution and solid form
arsenic
barytes
belladonna
carbolic acid
chloral
chlorofom
copper
corrosive sublimate, mercury
foxglove, 
fungi
hemlock
henbanes, thorn applea nd tobacco
hydrochloric aci
laburnum
laudanum, opium and morphia
lead
mushrooms
nitric acid or aquafortis
oxalic acid or acid of sugar
phosphorus
potash 
prussic acid
salts of lemon
strychnine
sulphuric acid or olio of vitriol
tartaric acid 
turpentine
unknown  

p266 straw hats to refresh
oxalic  dissolved in hot water / or fullers earth

p299
verdigris to remove
wash in strong soda water, wipe dry and apply without letting it touch the fingers, some sulphuric acid diluted with water 1 part acid to 12 of water. This is poison and must be mixed in an earthenware vessel. Any liquid left over should be immediately poured down the drain. 


---------------- 

Mrs B

adverts in front
top is Howards Soda - shown in a kind of block, paper wrapped package
howard's and sons Ilford
but others are for foodstuffs - new zealand lamb, bread crumbs and Oxo
at the back food stuffs again - tea, salt and curry powder


p78
modern housecraft
solvents and polishes
remember sje id assisted by a v lg number of chemical and scientific solvents and polishes. special preps for cleaning and reviving the various materials forming the modern home are easily and cheaply obtainable. today we find special cleansers for woodwork, others for wall paper, window and baths not to mention the various furniture creams and metal polishes - all are of very great service to the housewife.

p1466 to destroy moths in a carpet
damp huckaback towel, hot iron and not necessary to press hard- steam will do the job

p1474 iron mould stains
oxalic acid or salts of sorrel. another method is to cover the spot with salt then squeeze on lemon juice. Should the above be ineffective, saturate the stain with a drop of diluted hydrochloric acid and at once rinse in a soon of warm water and ammonia then in clean water [no instructions on precautions/ care to be taken, or even use in the case of oxalic]

p 1478 mice - prevent with a cat, ordinary poisons such as phosphorus may be used to destroy mice, but old rags soaked in a little carbolic acid can be pressed into holes or spaces to destroy pests. 

p1480
for pewter to clean neglected
very obstinate stains may be removed by soaking the utensil in a bath of pickle, made of freshly slaked lime and soda

p1481
pipes slimy to clean 
dissolve copperas and leave it to work its way through the pipes. 

p1485
straw hats does mention the oxalic
tar stains - paraffin, benzene or petrol

p1564 disinfectant recipes as before

poisons as before


---------------1907

household requisites 

plate 12 of branded goods between p78 p79 

p94 table 

poisons mostly as before but wo 1st and last items - acetic acid, strychnine tartaric acid 
turpentine
unknown 

p1804
tar stains - only paraffin listed
ribbons much more complicated (was just ammonia soon) (p1808)

p1811 iron mould from linen specifies a little powdered oxalic, neutralise w cream of tartar 