Wasting Girl's Time The history and politics of home economics 
Dena Attar

p35
focus on bottle feeding infants because this can be taught in class - cannot teach breastfeeding - undermines women. 
p36
questions that tried to introduce men into ideas about parenting ignored the issues faced by single mothers and lesbians. 

p37 
histories of early yrs of domestic economy teaching provide favourable account (treating as entirely unproblematic) Hele Sillitoe 1933 and Ailsa Yoxall 1913, commissioned by Association of teachers of domestic subjects. Like Margaret WEddell's Training in Home Management (1955) which deals with early teaching of home craft must e seen as partisan - Weddell was chairman of the ATDS. Anxiety about living standards in working class homes (feckless, ignorant housewives) the official explanation although they ale acknowledged that parents had good reason to suspect that some amongst the middle class domestic reformers were chiefly concerned with securing a better supply of skilled secants. 

feminist historians (Davin, DAvid, Dyhouse, Purvis, Lewis and Turnbull
more critical - disseminate a middle class domestic ideology through training g housework and exhortations about a woman's place in the home. 

p49
whatever the supposed merits home ec displaces the teaching of other subjects
Augusta Webster A housewife's opinoin 1879
when steadying domestic subjects, they are not learning anything else (e.g. science, a language, geography, maths). More evident to Webster then, than it is to observers now. 
Opting for home ec means dropping other subjects. 

p50 school subjects have not acquired gender labels in isolation, but in relation to each other. 

p51
teachers encouraged to act in ways which cold be and often were, seen as usurping the mother's role. Required to project an image which in some ways supplanted that of the mother. 
"many children model themselves on their teacher and the impression of her personality may last all their lives" advice on neat dress, nice voice and good at crafts to women thinking about becoming home ec teachers. Crease 1965
Margert Clark - 1970 -socially acceptable modes of speech dress and behaviour. good taste in clothes etc. home ec teacher as well groomed super housewife setting an example for the girls. Represent an approved version of femininity, whether their bassc skills teaching duplicates or contradicts what pupils have already leaned at home. 

p103
The ATDS representing domestic subjects teachers who had not been trained to teach science,e had proposals on linking science with house craft which would safeguard their member's jobs. Suggestions were that ta course of house craft should form an essential part of a woman's education and that ll girls in Secondary Schools should be given the opportunity of taking such a course {(1911) Girls would take elementary science for t 3 yrs and be instructed in house craft for a min of 2 consecutive hrs per week, not including needlework, for their last two years in school . The house craft and science emistresses would correlate their work as tara s practicable so that in physics lessons girls study transference of heat in a way applicable to cooking methods, while in chemistry they would learn about air in connection w house ventilation, water in connection with washing and about a few basic chemicals used in the home. 

p104 Manthorpe (1985) argued this history of differentiation has kept girls out of mainstream science. It has also kept science removed from everyday life and preserved its image as masculine and hard. 

p105 Assocation continued to stress the scientific element in domestic subjects in the hope it would give qualifications in domestic science greater credibility and respect. 1975 pamphlet on value of  A levels:
Science of food and nutrition. Science of textiles in relation to manufacture use and care. Science of cleaning materials. 

p106 greater academic respectability - science used by home ec as a cosmetic
although textbooks use language of science - experiment, control, method - they have no serious role in guiding pupils towards scientific discovery. 

p107
Nuffield home ec textbook 1985, p148 - spread mixture of oil and dust on a variety of surfaces and clean them with a selection of different products and tabulate results under heading s such as cleaning agent number of wipes length of time, amount of physical energy observation of result. The format is taken from science although the pupil does not learn any. pupils should draw occlusions about which cleaning substances an methods are most satisfactory for which surfaces. Although they could have got this from reading the label. [or could they have discovered that some are in fact multipurpose when they are not described as such?)


p119
head of boys school talking about how to better provide : avoid feeling of girls stuff, catering as vocational aspect - maintain distinction between girls cookery and acting the room should be organised and equpeed along the lines of hotel and service kitchens 0 that is acnetre island for cooking with prep and wahsing/ cleaning areas around the perimeter (Brokman 1971) 
designed to or anise hierarchically, not for individuals expected to do all their won prep and cleaning up. Draws attenion to traditional home ec room, divided into self contained workspaces shared by pair of pupils. Inapproprialey feminine to larger scale teamwork, but still not equal satiates workers communing their efforts. 

p121 
emphasis on personal care, good grooming or valeting, with minimal attention to what used to be called laundry work. boys were not to be taught house craft, but could study home care and maintenance. Money management  and budgeting had sufficiently masculine appeal. 
boys should take advantage of home like ambience of the home ed dept , a privilege usually enjoyed exclusively by tier - should be welcome to poplin to remove a stain, sew on a button, wash and iron a muddied shirt to prevent a telling off from an overworked mum or just to offer help in getting something repaired or ready for the next lesson. We know that tfor the most part they are all excuses to come for a chat. The house craft room is the home within the xholl tha dn girls have tended to regard this as their own, a jealously guarded sanctum (Myers 1971) 

p122 teachers views on subject areas which held most interest for boys: cookery, household repairs, household management, family relationships and health education. different curriculum from that usually followed by girls. 

p125 boys used machines unnecessarily - Neil used a food processor to chop a single tomato. 
p126
girls were not denied access to machines, but didm not used them withough good reason. Teachers have seized on machines as a way of drying boys into home economic - opportunity to fix things and fiddle with hardware in general. 
computers and industrial machined have been brought into home economics to help establish new identity as a branch of design and technology, while also dielibrarely or coincidentally making it more masculine. 
Textiles - needlework repulsive to boys, but lure of knitting machines and electric sewing machines aim to attract interest of more boys. 

p139
girls rehearsing for adult roles. If the girls go along with this their images of themselves may be threatened and they may invite the contempt of some of the ir pees and teachers. If they don't, their resistance is going to bring them into collision with the aims of the courses. Resistance: subvert course content. 
