Marion Cran - garden writer and first female gardening radio broadcaster
		learned about the Steiner methods of biodynamic gardening from a visit to Mrs Howard Pease

Margaret [Marna] Pease nee Kynaston (Married to Howard Pease)
	where was the garden that Marion visited and learned about biodynamic gardening? Was it the Pease’s house Old Mill House in Bray?  I think this is more likely than Northern properties, Otterburn Tower etc. 
	
	http://www.gaskellfamily.com/HerbertSnow.htm
	Margaret Snow known as "Marna" in the family was born on 19th September 1866 and was baptised by her father in Eton College Chapel on  1st November 1866. She married in Cheltenham Registration District, as Margaret Kynaston, on 27th October 1887 at St Luke's Church by the Bishop of Newcastle, Howard Pease of Pendover; Enfield Lodge, Newcastle-upon-Tyne; and Otterburn Tower, Northumberland. Her final home was Old Mill House at Bray, where she died on 31st August 1947
	
	http://www.london-gazette.co.uk/issues/38091/pages/4733/page.pdf
	
	Is this the same Old Mill House but described as Clewer, where Jimmy Page and Michael Caine lived? 

Marna Pease was very into Rudolf Steiner’s teachings, she also certainly encouraged and influenced Lady Chance - see the Progonion website where some memoirs have been transcribed. This (as well as the fact that they’re listed on the Peerage website) demonstrates that the Pease were well connected, upper class and not exactly ordinary. 

I think this is probably where the trail ends for this connection unless anyone mentions Marion Cran’s ideas / writing about organic gardening methods influencing them. I wonder if Cran spoke about it on the radio? Or went any further in her books? I don’t think  Isaw anthing other than throughts and trying to be methodical about manuring etc in order to learn what works best. 

The survey of “organic gardening? in the Bodlein catalogue showed that there was definitely a growth of interest in these methods over time, also that there were certain publishers taking the direction of “alternative methods” and that the Henry Doubleday Research Foundation really took off in publishing in the 80s, which is later than I thought it would. Perhaps complementary searches for gardening, composting, garden chemicals, garden care would help to show the bigger picture of what kinds of information were being taken up or broadcast to the public. This is a more general method than goign through all the magazines, can be counted as prparation as the general themes should be visible and books will perhaps be reivewed or therwise commented on.  