National Allotments Journal

generally seeds, shows and limes are advertised. 

every issue contains an advert
Don't pay fancy prices
National Organic Fertiliser and National Guano & Lime (air dried) each of the above is a complete Manure

The most staisfactory subs for stable manure. Twenty times as rich in humus formin gmaterial. Has a unique mechanical action creats a good texture in all soils and assist in retaining moisture. Can be used at every stage of cultivation. 
£8 per ton
8' per bag
send 1' for sample
impt to secretaries - we require a live agent in each allotment society. Will you kindly act as such or nominate one of your members. 

December 1931
p15 full page ICI advert
On Your Allotment USe
concentrated complete fertilizer No. 5
Use it and watch results
full particularas and all info from the following offices of Imperial chemical Idustires Limited
Bristol 
Birmingham 
leicester 
london
liverpool
 newcastle
 
 p18 Lime and Liming
 ...Lime was known to the ancients as a sweetner of the soil and although they did not know the ;reason why' they profited by the results of applying it. We today are so concerne with probing into the reasons for everythig that we are inclied to minimise the impc of th eeffects. We sometimes behave rather like the inquiisitive man on the sinking linker whose investigation into the cause of the leak took hi into the hold and eventually to the bottom of the sea while the rest of hte crew escaped. 
 If every tiller of the soil no matter what size his holding would get firmly into hi shead the aciom "Lime is the basis of soil fertility" the hope of every thoughtful person for this country to become as nearly as possible self supporting would at once be brought out of the realm of faerie  and into thos of practial politics. 
 
 March 1932
 p2 Manures and Manuring
 farm compost, green manre superphosphatem kainit sulphate of ammonia top dressing of nitrate. 
 
 p3 limes such as "Limbux" "hydrate limes - prep by treating very pure hot lime with water. For small users this form is perhaps the best in which to buy lime sinci it is specailly prep for them, is perfectly safe and clean to handle and is obtainable in bags. Lime is nomrally sold in bulk in six ton trucloads for ag o r ind use. Thus the smallholder is in difficulty if he only promoses to lime say half and acre. For him the proprierty brand of hydrated lime should alswys be the choice
 
 lime is not a fert
 handpicked lump lime of Buxton disctirct
 various grdaes of screened lime - residues from it, 
 ground limestone and the propeietry limes for gareden use usch as Limbux specially prepared lump lime slaked down to afine white poiwder. There are also waste limes osld under such names as Billingham Lime, Netham LLime. [Netham is where the Bristol ICI plant is, as is Bilingham - Newcastle]
 All equally effienct. 
 
 
 "p22  June 1932
 Saffordhire federatioin's great rally
 Over 1000 allotment holders and their wives attended..."
 male pasttime - the holders are unequivocally men
 
 
 p16 Sept 1932
 soil ests experts recomment napthalene discriminateing Gardeners use the Safe Quality Double Ring brand
 to kill slugs and all soil pest without injury to plnat life. speical terms to allotment associon. 
 nothing else is just as good. 
 Miss Maud Bower writes an article
 
 A lot of the appeals and booklets to send for come from the Friends building in  Euston - what is the relationship between the Allotment Association and the Quakers ?
 
 
 Advert for Multiple Plant Food 
 Pan Britanica Industries Ltc
 vegetables ... good to look at
 feminised vegetables - pouting / open mouths and long lashes -  appealing to male allotment holder/ veg growing. 
 
  midsummer 1934
 p11 
 rabbit manure for Gardens
  W King Wilson
  The scarcity of horse manure arising from th emotor car rpelcing horse traffic cannot always be satifactory met by replacemnt w artifical manures 
  rabbit - feeds mainly on surplus garden produce and weeds during six to 8 months a year meets this gap. 
  
  Natoinal Rabbit Council - apeal to rabbit keepers to provide free gifts of breeding doe rabbits for unemployed persons. Application should be made direct to the secretary. 
  
  midsummer 1934
 p16
 get photocopy :) 
 NOM NOM NOM
 
 
 National Allotments Journal
 No21 Autumn1934
 p10
 Attractive Allotments and the National Scheme
 article on tidiness of allotments
 p11 continued - introduction of idea of sodium chlorate, which seems to be a new chemical
 caution about inflammable gas
 
 No 22Winter 1934 p16 and 19 (17, 18 advertisement)
 A wonderful weedkiller
 readers have taken such great interest - duty to make a few more enquiries about it
 correction re inflammable gas, description of friction
 
 Spring
 No23 Spring 1935
 p19 A wonderful weedkiller continued
 cannot obtain it from seedsmen or chemists and socs cannot afford to buy it direect from importers - arranged with national hort supplies to pack it in small containers suitablefor societies and their members
 
 paths - appearance of the national ameity scheme
 but also avoid waste of bare fallowing by using sodium chlorate
 
 
 No 25 Autumn 1935
 p1  editorial - Soil Testing
 long felt need amongst plotholders and gardeners for a simple yet effieicnt soil testing device which would show clearly the various degrees of acitiy and alkalinity (sweetness) in soils. The NAS has a leaflet on the subject buty what is far better, it can supply an excellent unit, invented by an agricultual chemit so that gardeners may quite easily carry out their own tests. The price is 1s 2d post free of 1s if societies order quantities. 
 
 Mistakes in soil managemnt
 John Stoney  [Stoney Also wrote Ministr of Agriculture Bulletin No90]
 liming and manuring section 
 must congratulate the National on the introduction fo teh "Analoam" soil indicator. It is very simple to operate. But be gaurded against using too much lime unless the soil indicators shows extreme acidity according to the colour chardt. 
 
 not turning up anything called analoam! I must have one!
 
 No 26 
 Winter 1935/6
 last page - 20
 poisons - insecticides fungicides etc
 new Poisons list comes into force on May 1st next. Only qualified chemists can sell. Societies wishing to sell insecticides etc named in PArt II must appliy for registration. 
 
 No27 Spring 1936
 p18
 national amenity scheme notes
 this is where we see the first ref to patriotism - 
 Good deal of interst shown in the sheme this year by local authorities and allotment orgs. 'the men on the plots' 
 what a difference attnetion to little thigns makes - the weekeing of paths, gatheing up and burning of rubbish
 The spring cleaning germ which attacks women at this part of the year - or something like it - seems to have infected the men on the allotments as well. If we go on at this rate man of our allotments will be as attractive as public gardens - and why shouldn't they be? 
 
 
 No 28 Summer 1936
 p3 continued artole on The plotholders; parliament
 "From north, south, east and west they come, these allotment men - and women too [in the conference group photo there are at least 8 women - tiny proportion - can really only tell by their hats, at least they're mixed throught he group]. [Men described, women not] Men who have grown old in the cuase, but who are still young and buoyant in spirit. Young men who m we have never seen before, but who bid fair to become doughtly champions ofour movement. 
 
 29 
 autumn 1936
 p24 (back page_ 
 tips - Correspondent in the Times states that a small pinch of sulphate of ammonia applied to the crown of thistles in thes pring completely destroys them, causing the root to rot. Where this fert is used infeils aresaid to be practially free from thistles. [no account of having tested it, or where to obtain, or any precations - see also pinch]
 
 1937 sees the number of adverts rise considerably
 more pesticides, fertilisers and tools (spades, twines) 
 
 
 Garndiffaith Allotment Women's Guild is an integreal part of the loacl Association. We could fill thr journal with the good work which it carries on. ITs second Annual Party was a pronounced success. After tea a gift tree which contained present for the children was openeed by Mr Purvis of  Usk Agricultural instituion Mr and Mrs C Rawlings in recognition of their great work bringing the Guild into being were the reciipent of present - the former recieved cigarettes and the latter a handbag
 
 Broom Soeity Rotherham is trying an experiemnt by offering half plots of 150 yards each to the sons adn daughter of allotment holders to encourage them to take up gardneing. PRactical isntrucion will also be given [this is in response to concern that not enough oung people are coming through]
 
 Spring 1938 No 35 p21-22
importanc of home-grown food 
extract from The Times datae 21st March seems to indicate that allotments - in cold storage for so long - may be brough out by the Govt and used to imporve the healt h of the people and increase th nation's food supply. [Does not comment further on the article which refers to the new Housing Bill and a circular letter suggesting provision of poutly keeping facilities at new houses buildt in rural areas"
 
 No 36 Summer 1938
 p12 in reporting on Conference
 A recommendation to the Central Allotments Committee to offer as an alternative choice an organic fertilizer in addition to the chemical one already supplied under the Assistnace Scheme was brought forward by the Barnsley Federation. Mr Casper, Barnsley, proposing, said that htis wa a long felt want. To continte to does land with this highly concnetrated chemical substance supplied under the shceme was like the habitiual taking of asprin tablets: there came a time when itdid more harm htna good. He also dalt with the objections against the proposal, and concluded by stating that by the continued use of the fertilizer supplied more was being taken out of th eland than was being put on. Mr Bland, Derby seconded. mr Purvis Monmouth who i s an expert on these matters was then asked by the chairman ot give th eConverence the benefit of his k and experience. 
 All manure he said are good bt some are better than others. the fert supplied under the scheme was the best value obtainable. fcourse itneeded balanceing wiht organic matter but a good gardener had this ready to hand in the  form of clean waste veg matter... A great number of organic fertilizers were on the market which in porportion to thier bulk were highly expensive and of very little real value to the allotment holder. He warned deleates agaoinst the specious advertier. The resltuion was then voted on and lost. 
 p13
 Cottage gareners - resolution to put cottage gardenrers on the same level as allotment holders re supply of cheap rates lime and slg. Cottage gardens had been substituted for allotments on some of the newly built estates but were penalised by not being in the system for getting cheaper equipment, seed etc. 
 
 Autumn 1938 No 37
 Front page - lord Beaverbrook's stirring call to allotmentholders. 
 (Daily Express) 
 comment on page 2the recentr crisi through which the country has passed... extrememurgenc of bringin more land under allotment cultuvation and arresting the deline. allotment take time. Daily eExpresshave inaugurated a mangnificent competition . Rally our forces. 
 p10 competition mentioned again
 untidiness is the thing that worries people about allotments. 
 
 Autumn 1939 no41
 1939 
 Dig for victory - all the advertisers start hammering this 
 "national importance" etc 
 
 soil tet for lime - take a dozen very small samples of soil from different parts of the plot, mix them up well, place a small quantity in a tumbler and pour on it a wineglassful of muriatic acid (easily obtainable). If the liquid fizzes and bubbles freely there is suffieicnt lime presetn. If it does not buggle or only feebly, a liberal dressing of lime is necessary. 
 
 Winter 1939/40
 No 42
 front page 
 not digging alone which brigns success in the garden. Good fert, seedsa dn other gardening requipments are equally impt. We cannot do better than commed the firms goods whose advertisements appear in these pages. 
 
 p29
 common pests and their control
 onion fly celery fly carrot fly - uts omething that the flies do not like as a deterrent on or around the plant before the flies lay their eggs eg jeyes fluid 1 part in 100 parts water or scatter creosote and sifted ashes or crude napthalene on the soil 
 
 Spring 1940 no 43
 p24
 propaganda aimed at wrong target - JArrow Allotments committee has written to the Durham County Council pleading iwth them to steop sending so much propaganda a nd literature in view of the fact that there are many vacant allotments already in Jarrow. It seems to be the Jarrow men-in-the-street who need gingering up. 
 
 Summer 1940 no44
 p1
 We must grow more... numerous difficulties in the way ARP LDV long working hours and all the rest of it. Yest difficulties are made to be overcome and right well they are doing it in some places. The women and the older children are keeping the plots going and so great is their interest that if a watchful eye is not kept upon them they will want to stick to them after the war!
 
 dust seeds with flouwers of sulphure or lime and charcoal, ora mix of all three and store seeds in dry place (p4) 
 
 p6
 urgency of spraying potatoes as safeguard against late blight. Bordeaux mix and burgandy mix are two reliable wet sprays while colloidal copper dust applied through hand bellows is a good powder spray.... in certain industrial districts sprayin ginjures the foliage. Happily in these districts the disease is not a menace. I suggest that local enquiry be made as to the advisability of spraying. 
 
 p8
 feeding tomatoes
 superphospate of lime, sulphate of ammonia and sulphate of magnesia (Epsom salts) and sulphate of lime (gypsum). Iused this mixture in the last war when potash supposed to be an indispensible tomato food was as difficult to obtain as it is now. 
 
 p12
 Growing for victory
 .. deplorable practice: people hwo should be cultivating their own plots but are too idel or indifferent to do so. In certain part of the country large numbers of these people are invading allotments and buying up surplus produce grwon by allotment holders. It is unpatriotic to *dig for drones* who ought to dig for themselves. 
 
 p23 advert
 Grovie soil viatlizer contains compresse soil bacteria
 brick wrapped in Cellophane. 
 natuarl mineral salts. rich in humus rish in organic matter. 
 entirely new scientific principle. 
 
 Allotment and Leisure Gardener
 autumn
 1984
 colour printing, slick
 New graphics for jeyes fluid
 new graphics highligh uses as an outdoor disinfiectan in addition to application as a gardening aid. Retailn familiar logo and no feature ullustrations showing key usage area. Clear directions on the reverse detail many other uses at a glance. New leaflet The guide to outdoor hygeine is now availabel on request. Season by season how when and where to use JF. 
 
 
 Also interesting point about toilets
 	there for a while, only natural = women more difficult than men. 
 	
 Allotment and Leisure Gardener 
 summer 1985
 p27 
 Which?- dwells mainly on the garden centres listed - customer service etc.
 
 also p27 
 survey by British Vinegars demonstrates that 49% of respondents claim to engage in home pickling and pickling vinegar is the fastest growing sector of the UK vinegar makret. That's not so surpring whne you think that thera re now about 1/2 million active plots in this country and half of allotment owners are women.  [like an advertorial for the vinegar in question]
 	
 