The Natural Garden 
Roger Grounds
Davis-Poynter London
1976

dedicated to Mother and Father who first taught me to appreciate the natural world 

Appendix: Dangerous Chemicals


Introduction of book - 
p9 
natural gardneing as an attitude. It can be neat not weedy. *Learning* to gerden without chemicals - pesticides, insecidtides, miticides, fungicides and herbicides. Gardening with nature, not against. 

not subtle and subversive - chemi mfc industries
not banner waving attempt to start ecological revolution
every garener who *abandons chemicals* and takes up natural gardening is improvind the world he lives in. It is a book about gardening without poisons. 

p10 "vicious spiral of having to produce ever more andmmore deady poisons to keep up with ourselves
encourage nature to fight the battle for you. 

modern chlorinated hydrocarbons and organophosphorus chemicals singled out as as doing harm. 

sense of connectedness, food chains, preoccupation with DDT

p13 "It really does seem incredible, and crazy that if you want arsenic to poisn the rats in your cellar, you have to sign a poison register, yet you can walk into any garden centre and buy, off the shelf, poison fifteen times or more as poisonous. Make no mistake, there is no such thing as a safe poison, wahtever the label on the can ays. It's worth remembers too that modern pesticides are brain-children of the Second World War. They were developed originally as nerve gases. They were meant to kill people, not pests."

unknown, suspicion, not proven

p19
"essential chemicals" - those present in the soil 

very much big picture - how your garden soil is connected to much larger geologies

p25 observations to carry out on soil to establish what kind of soil structure - no discussion here about acidity or alkalinity


p32  Section on macro and micro nutrients in soil
The most important of all plant fooda re perhaps surprisingly, the ones that are least ofte mentioned. They are hydrogen, oxygen and carbon. Plants obtain these form the air and water... you cannot actyally feed plants neat hydrogen, ox, and C. Uou will not find it pre-acked at your loacal garden centre. 

Calcium, phosphorus, potassium and nitrogen described in terms of overall function in the plant

p35
If you are a born natural observer, look at the vegetation,  both wild and cultivated: that will tell you quite a lot. If everyone is growing rehodo and camellias, you live ona n acid soil. IF lilacs abound, it is very alkaline. IF your hydrangeas are all pink you r soil is alkaline and if thye are blue it is scid. They blue at pH5. Brackn gows on very acid soisl. Groundsel only on v alkaline. soils can vary a lot in short distance. 

Delegate soil testing - send it out (Full analysis). 
Test DIY -  buy kit from chemist and most garden centre. Complete with full instructions on how to use and what the results tell you.  (pH  only)

p48
to make an acid soil netural you add lime The problem here is that the word lieme has been so much used and misused of the years that a considerable confusion has arisin as to just what is meant by lime .There are 3 sorts
1) quicklime = burnt lime = calcium oxide = CaO
2) slaked lime = hydrated lime = calcium hydroxide = Ca(OH)
3) ground limestone = ground chalk = carbonate of lime = CaCO3

quicklime should be avoided - burn hands, burn organisms in soil, burn roots,  not effective 
2 ) somewhat desirable, no burning effects and is readily available, but need vast amout to make a different
3) is best = small applications, last a long time. 

p49
manufacturers, or rather packagers of lime are inclided to tall ou to apply the lime at x grammes or x lbs per m2 or sq yd. Life is not that simple. Differnt soil types respond at diferent rates. Provides table to use appropriate amt according to soil type and pH. 

US recommends powderedd sulphur and alumnimn sulphate for making alkaline soil neutral or acid

do not use aluminum sulphate for netuarlising an alkaline soil - uses deposit of aluminum
powedered sulphur is less obnoxious but it is toxic and best not used in the garden at all. 
use moss peat and bulky organic manures. (nothing on sustainability of peat) 


p52
if you buy "complete fertilizer" it contains N P and K, no Ca
p53
in America mfcs have started addint trace elements, mainly Boron and magnesium to complete artivical fertilisters - no harm since plants will not use the unless they need them. You jst waste more of you rmoney. Tacit admission of the incompletenes sof compelte artiicl fertilisers. If you are readin gthis book you prob do not need convincing tha t art fert are a bad thing 

p60-61
if you read gardening magazines often enough esp if you flick through the advertisements, or if you often browse around your local garden centre, you may well have the impression that the world is full of activators and that you cannot runa n effieicnt compost bin eiwthout the use of activtos. Use manures, human urine, dried blood (bought). 

good focus on earthworms functions

p65
Ironic them ,that one of the worlds most widel yused agricutlural art fert ammonium sulphate is used by green keepers on golf courses as a worm-killer. 

p81
water, milk, kerosene or parafin to kill pests. washing up liquides as effective as paraffin. 
Derris, pyrethrum (alternate for best results) nicotine
Nicotine - deadly to man, pets and benefiical insects - last resort. In UK sale to gardening public is prohibited so make your own. This is how. Simply sae all the butt-ends fro myour ashtrasy: if you do ot smoke make some arrangement to collect all the office butt-ends. Dump in a pial of water. Keep securtely locked in a closet. Sitre daily until mixture is dark thick and tarry. Strain into a bottle. LAbel clearly and keep in a locked cipboard out of reach of children. Use in spray gun diluted 
p82
after tmts is complete - pour any remaining liquied into a deep hole dug in the gorund, never pour it down a drain or sewer. Washout the bottle and store it in a locked cupboard. Cannot be stressed stongly enough that tnicotine should only be used as a last resort. It is a deadly poison to man, esp to ch and to most pets. Take no risks with it. 

Use bordeau mix - usually bought as a powder to be dissolved in water. 

Discussion about what weeds are and how digging encourages weeds, turning up dormant seeds. Do not dig, do not hoe. Keep weeds under control by mulching. Pluck the most virulent of weeds out. 

p98 - ground cover - understand what weeds are trying to achieve in order to control them.

p146
Lawns - modern chems seem to ahve offeered a short cut - weedfree lawn of fvivid greeness in a couple of years. Lawn feeds kill weeds 2,4-D - kills worms an dbirds that feed on the worms. And that vivid greenness is just a drug-induced hallucination. The lawn is leterally living in a drugged state of euphoria. Withdraw th eheavy application of cheicals and the withdrawl symptoms will be immediately noticeable. 

p150
looking ahead
temptation offered by lethal chemials -seem to promise instant sucess. Marketing strategy desinged to delibrartely implant into your mind the idea that we can be rid of almost any garden nuisance instantly at the squirt of an aerosol. Success may indeed be instant but it is also illusory. Ecological repercussions may take years even decades to cure or to even become apparent. 

No field of hman endeaover is success ever instant. WEre it to be so it would not be eworth having. Sucess of anytipe is something that can only be achieved by working for it, by disicple and by having in one's mind's eye a clear image of what one is striving for. 
kick the chemical killer habit - bug rebound pheon
bugs  chemically represeed so will reasert themselves just as someon who has had symptoms of acute anxiety repressed by a sedative will, fi the drug is withdrawn prematurely bread out in a violent attaock of those syptoms. 

appendix on dangerous chemicals stresses avoidance of chlorinated hydrocarbons (no brand names) and of organophosphates (again, no brand names, just chem names) 
organophosphates have been devloped form the lethal nerve gas Tabun (diisopropylflourophosphate). 
main insecticides developed from it are malathion, parathion, diazionon azodrin, TEPP, phosdrin and others. MAny sold in combination with others or with chlorinated hydrocarbons. All chloinesteraze inhib. Inactivate enzyme that breaks down acetylcholine - nerve transmittor. 
do not cause long term damnage to ecosystem, do not accumulate in the body. 
extremely dangerous to all mamals. 
If you were to eat for a main course a salad which continated lettuce whic had been sprayed with an organophoate which destroyed the carboxyesterase in your system and were to conlcude your meal with an apple aprayed with malathion [cannot be broken by the destroyed carboxy esterase]  the comgination could be fatal.



agricultural revolution - bash batter poison bugs into submission
attitude of man as master of the world