The Value of Weeds
Soil Association
1975
Stowmarket
printed by anglian repreographics finningham station stowmarket

all gardeners
more tolerant
why is it there? what can it tell me and how can I use it?

exterminate quite ruthlessly
uninvited

explains seeds, dispersal

doesn’t actually mention chemicals until almost the end of the first page - there must be some rational exp why weeds still persist in springing up in spite of all the efforts mde by man and his machines and chemicals to destroy them. 

p2 explains soil - decomposition of material, how plants are important to bould up soil and how they can indicate somethign about the soil 
p3 decomposition of leaves and stem allows minerals found deep in the soil to be brought to the surface. compost if not leave on top of soil
weeds do a job then disappear - the ground is nolonger suited to them. 
lessen the impact of heavy rain, conserve moisture. 

p4 a sudden crop of daisies ma mean that the soil i lacking in lime. 
reliable indicator of acid clay soil in need of drainage is horsetail. Once this fuilt has been dealt with it will dissapoer only to reaspper if soil fertilit falls adn wet conditions return to tht esoil
docks an sorrel indicated badly drained and acid soil
dandelions often the first sign of some deivicien. 
continues in this vein. 
p6 illustraiont of plants/flowers
p7 controlled use of weeds 
compost, not burn. robbing the soil. 
weeds not encouraged where there are seedlings and oung plants but should be pulled up and left to decay. 
p8 RHS report from 1952 in a soil assocn journal Mother Earth mentioned about application of compost to troublesome ground. 
p9 explains about worms not likeing acid soil
p10 gives examples of which weeds might be found on which kidn of soil
p11 liquid fertiliser - good mixture of weeds, an amount ou like
nettle - companion plant to herbs, improve quatlity and yeild of soft fruits. (has the abilit to stimulate the growth of other plants growing nearby) . good for compost and for tomato feed (soaked in rainwater 2-3 weeks), nettle infusion spray against mildew, blackfl, apis and plant lice in the green house or outside. add a tsp of liqud soap if used as fliar spry. only food of the peacock and small tortoishell. 
p13 horsetail  preventavie (not cure) against fungal disease as rich in silica
helpful agains black spot on rosea and mildew and other fungi on grapevines, veg, roses and fruit trees. 
2 good handfuls in a pan and cover with water, boil for 20 minutes, cover and cool, straing and dilute.

chamomile tea to prevent damping off of seedling - soak blossom in cold water, use soln to water seedbox. . Plants physician - sickly plants perk up when chamomile is planted near by. 

refers to compost booklet
whole page on current activities
provide qualified speakers
formed active groups
publish magazein and provide bookshop service
promote research and arrange field trials
conduct courses on the principles and practices of organic husbandry
provide advisory service for farmers and horticulturists who wish to adopt methods


p22 application form to join soil assockn
name/address/ occupation
under 25   25 to 45   45 to 65
we will put you in contact with our local Group. Information on our occupation will enable us to put you in touch with like minded members. 