Handyman Which?
1972, 2
p71-72
Soil Testing
instructions easy to follow, not all told what to do next, or what the results meant for plants
advises NPK test by RHS for accuracy (2 weeks, £1)
reasonably accurate and cheap
tubes flat bottomed- not need test tube rack
indicator rather than fizz of acid poured over soil - fizzed alkaline, acid if it didn't, but wouldn't tell you how acid or alkaline.


on using paint strippers safely - August 1972 p149 (147-149)
all contain chemicals which may irritate skin. wash off splashes immediately. None were flammable but all gave offa vapour which ca n be unpleasant to inhale. Use in ventilated room. Don't smoke while using them 0 inhaling the vapour through a cigarette can produce a poisonous by product. Remember to put the top back on the container.
we think all paint strippers should carry prominent warning aboutt washing off accidental splashes. 
opening away from your face
using w good ventilation
keeping away from children. 
none of the sizes we tested carried all four of these warninga ns those that carried any of them usually buried them in the instruction in small unobtrusive lettering. Nitromors and Thawstrip tell us they are going to improve their warnings. 

drawbacks - runny, vertical surfaces. Buy more materials (white spirit) to rinse off. 


most damaged plc more than rubber, so if you want to wear gloves to protect hands, rubber ones are better. 

February 1973 
p7-13
on weedkillers is about lawns, so paraquat products are not included. 
good explanations
p9
Safety - plants and people - all except Bentley's selective had adequate warnings on their labels about how to use them safely. Which? go into the reasons for this, explaining pray drift and vapour drift. As a general rule ou shouldn't store any of these products in a green house or potting shed where they're likely to be near plants (as one of our members found when his tomato crop continually found). Keep separate watering cans. Not everyone will be that careful, so we checked how easy those products are to wash out. Dicotox more liable to contaminate. A thorough washing with a detergent solution should remove all. We think this is the least you should do. 

all the branded weedkillers and weedkiller fertilisers we tested contained poisonous chemicals. The liquid brands are more concentrated than the dry powders. Obviously best to use it all at one and vital if ou have to store it that you keep it well out of reach of children. If you have a little left after doing your lawn, its best to throw it away down a drain, with lots and lots of water. Wash out the empty bottle before throwing it aaay. Keep the chem off skin and wash hands very carefully. If accidentally spray veg, they'll prob die. Don't eat them, not even the underground parts. May kill fish. 
5 instructions mention fusing a spoon for measuring. We don't think weedkillers should suggest using everyday household utensils for measuring out potentially dangerous chemicals. Other instructions - Dicotox and Supertox - talk about capfuls. This is much more sensible. 

to be safe... try not to buy more than you need at any one time. If you have to store them, keep them well away from children and pets, plants and seeds and other garden chemicals. 

p10
Agricultural chemicals approval scheme
mess that the brand has been approved on behalf of the ministry. Some manufacturers voluntarily submit their products or approval. To get it , the pesticide must be reasonably effective against the pests (inc weeds) listed on the label. The label must also give the ingredients, the dosage and ned precautions. Fertilisers, and therefore weedkiller/fertilisers, are not covered by this scheme. 

--------------
p57 Paraquat - Environmental boon, human disaster?  (still Feb 73)

Every gardener has always dreamed about something to take all the effort out of getting rid of weeds. something that kills them quickly and effectively; something that lets him user the ground a few days after the weeds have gone and something that gives him few ecological worries. Paraquat does all these things. But since paraquat weedkillers were introduce in 1962, about 70 people all over the world, have died from accidental poisoning by them. In Britain about four or five people die each year. Exactly how many weeds is a human life worth?

P weedkillers sold in tow ways
in shops - Weedol and Pathclear. grey brown granules which dissolve in water. Used to contain 5%, now contains 2.5 % each paraquat and diquat - extend range of weeds killed. Pathclear contains simazine, longer lasting and shouldn't use it aroun dplant.s 

farmers and horticulutralists can buy an number of more concentrated p w from local authority listed stockist. The brand bough most is Gramoxone. a brown liquid 20% . In this more concentrated form paraquat is listed as a Part II poison under the 1933 Pharmacy and poison act. 

neither weedol or path clear is particularly dangerous once you've diluted them with water. You'd then need to drink about two gallons to die. Both brands list precautions to follow when you're making them up and using them. These have been cleared by the Pesticides Saftey Precautions Scheme. In their granulated form these weedkillers are potentially more dangerous. But you'd still need to eat about 4oz to die, and to put it in perspective, a packet of Weedol is, perhaps, no more dangerous than a bottle of aspirins. No one has accidentally died from eating the granules. 

Grmoxone and others. 
Potentially mores dangers. One mouthful, even if you spit it out, may be enough to keel. So far not a single professional user of paraquat (farm workers, local authority workers and so on) has been accidentally poisoned while using it oat work. Nealry all the accidental poisoning by paraquat have happened around th home .After drugs like aspirin and barbs, paraquat i son e of the main poisons which kill children under 5 in this country. Gramoxone is the usual cause. It looks like Coca Cola and if its brought into the home in an empty drinks bottle it  may be a temptation for a chile to take a mouthful.  
The poison srules, (made unde rthe piston s act) should prevent listed stockists form either selling these more conc weedkiller to non professional users, or pouring them from they original container into some other bottle. But they don't stop the professional user form decanting it into a drinks bottle and perhaps giving it to his friends and this i show some of the accidents have happened. All the brands carry warning that they contain par aqua rand should be put into drinks bottles. On Gramoxone the word poison is clearly market in large letters. Others are not as clear. 

conc. 
little problem with Weedol and Pathclear. Follw instructions and don't try to store any you may have left, its unlikely that either you or odour family will come to any harm. 
More difficult re concentrated
adequate labelling hasn't yet work
putting omw restrictions on the sale of paraquat (it was listed as a poison in 1968) hasn't world. 

Tremenoud aid to farmers, horticulturists and gardeners. Sold in a form no more dangerous than many other substance we use daily. So it is not sensible to ban them alto ethers. But as long as they continue to be sold in their present concentrated form, people will go on being poisoned. We thing the least the mfcr ICI should do is to try, as they are doing, to make the very concentrated weedkillers less appealing to children - giving them an obnoxious smell perhaps, or changing the form to thick liquids of granules. If this fails, they should sell it only in diluted form. We think that in addition, the Govt should take steps to exert stricter control over the way conc paraqaut weedkillers are sold and the way they're stored in use. 