ICI the company that changed our lives
Carol Kennedy

paraquat etc 
Charles Suckling and McCarthy of ICI and FR Bradbuy rejected John Jewkes et al's *The Sources of Invention* - linear progression from original idea to commercial devt at the mercy of chance timing and state of existing tech.

They preferred the screening model - view to practical application

research targets change - paraquat first dismissed because the research team was looking for a selective weedkiller. 

p5
scientists shared something: the prepared mind that sees what other miss. discoveries are often the result of the right mind, the alert mind, being in the right place at the right time. 
Boon reflects 'It's astonishing how many major inventions are traceable to one perhaps two people seeing the significance of an unusual and unexpected result. 
Boon maintains the true nature of invention ... identifying the potential and commercial possibilities from an unexpected result. 

p136
Boon said of paraquat "the most significant development in agriculture since the invention of the wheeled plough"

p142
selective weedkiller - cereals are waxy and upright while most of the weeds are hairy and spread out horizontally. When sprayed with weedkiller the spray tends to run off the upright waxy stalks of grain and remain on the leaves of weeds. 

hormone weedkiller works differently,

p143
1950s - crop protection chemistry Blackley and Runcorn and the physical separation form activities of biologist and agriculturalists at Jealott's Hill became increasingly inconvenient - synthetic programmes got out of synch with screening work in Berkshire. Reorganisation was needed. 
1954 Boon and team of 4 organic chemist moved to join 2 colleagues in formulation research section at Jealott's. Would also be joined by new recruits directly to Jeallots. 

1947 field observation 

Boon recalled in 1986 that the structure given to the diquat compound in the Blackley collection was 'completely wrong' and said that if the chemist who selected it had known the right one he would probably never have chosen it in the first place. 

Boon recalled that he suggested thinking about this in a different way. The fact that they aren't selective and don't stay in the soil isn't a disadvantage. New potential. Lots of argument. dogged determination. 

p144
in 1972 Boon was awarded a £1000 prize Mullard Award from the Royal Society for his work on the discovery and development of the dipyridyl herbicides. He used half of it to fund a Boon award for perseverance at ICI. 

p146
very expensive to make paraquat and diquat at first 
first batch 50lbs cost £50 000 - and still had to be converted to diquat. Crop protection was losing money for ICI (which caused reorganisation and redundancies in 1959)

ICI chemist found an uneconomic methods  - Boon: 'involved disposing of an awful lot of arsenic afterwards, It was mixed with concrete and dumped at sea.'

Frank Bradbury and Charles Suckling developed a process to make diquat at an economical price. Mond division developed a process for the mfc of  paraquat. Plant so complex that it assured a virtual monopoly of mfc. In August 1962 Gramoxone was launched. 

chemical plough idea came along after launch. 

grassland consultant (not in ICI) commented to Boon - when we plough up grassland we bury so much of our fertility - we kill it. Paraquat tmt left dead grasses on the surface and acted as a mulch and protecting agent against erosion in windswept places, the sort of pasture where conventional ploughing is most difficult. 

grassland renovation - lambs grazing on treated area gained more 40% weight
much less effort to get this gain when using paraquat. 

p147
the last fifty years have seen a profound change in people's attitudes to pesticides: As Dr Boon said, with a touch of sadness, it has become 'a word with evil associations' in connection with dangers to the environment. Yet these have been of concern in the lab since discoveries were made - certainly those of diquat and paraquat. 

Boon formed 'Ecology Section' prob the first of its kind - indirect effects of destroying aquatic weeds on which diquat was used in early tests 

1969 ICI brought all the facets of this work together in to Environmental Sciences Group at Jealott's Hill. 

Commerical benefit of this - 3 yrs later, new and stringent regulation on pesticides were introduced by US EPA. ICI on verge of entering American market = well placed to comply. 

p148
effect of paraquat on humans. 
no fatalities or injuries recorded when it was being used properly. 
Dr Frank Rose  on pharmaceuticals in general, as soon as a new chemical along someone sooner or later tries to commit suicide with it. Boon stressed that paraquat is no more dangerous than bleach or lavatory cleaners when swallowed. Decanted into branded drinks bottle. 
gained sinister reputation when during an inquest on a case of paraquat poisoning. The answer being no, Boon remembered 'Every time it was mentioned in the press after that, it was the chemical which has no antidote. But 99 per cent of chemicals have no antidote at all - even asprin and paracetamol. You can treat the poisoning, but not in a true antidote sense, where one chemical neutralise another. 

Boon's name not on patent - 
citatation as FRS was a composite one for contributions to organic chemistry and the development of bipyridylium herbicides. 

p158
Kennedy points out that as Boon was developing theories on bipyridylium herbicides Rachel Carson was writing a book that would change public's attitudes to the chemical industry and assumptions about technological progress. 

p183
In this book Dr William Boon is a rare example of the inventor or key discoverer acting as product champion, though even in the 1960s he could not have taken paraquat through to full devt on his own. 

Maybe the archives at Widnes will say whether the company did any development or testing with respect to care of new plastic surfaces or synthetic products stain removal (not so much laundry as has defo been done)...?


