Ideas in Action from ICI 
campaign

27.06.1974 p5
Better insulation for warmer homes - special foam Ufoam plus - homes can be kept warmer at less cost
Insecticides that select their prey
insecticides that kill at random destroy a farmer;s allies along with his foes - somehting no farmer want to do. That's why iCI developed a selective insecticide, sold as Aphox fo farmers, Rapid to gardeners - that kill armful aphids without harming the ladybirds that prey on tehm - or the bees that polinate the blossoms 
Modern heart durgs. Some heart complains can practialccly immobilise a man, restricitng him to an inactive life. Sports such as sailing woud be impossible for him [image of man sailign]. But medicines invented by ICI can combat the painful and inhibiting effects of these complaints. Already 2.5 million people around the world can lead more normal activ eand fulfilling lives. 

£2000 million exports That's the total since 1963. In 1973 ICI employees produced £1 million in exports every day.
Saving fuel - By burning chemial wastes ICI's Wilton power station is able to save the country millions of gallons of fuel oil a year. 
Research To keep pace with international copetition ICI devotes much time and money to research. Almost one employee in ten works in research on which £70 million was spent in 1973. 

08.07.74  p8
anaestietic, BCF, insectiicde
Research, ICI asa customer, Exports,

27.08.74 p8
ICI action for the future
The future starts now
10yrs ICI has invested £1000 million in new plant in the UK. Deptned ofn ICI being able to earn the profits to pay for them. 
2 new plants on Teeseide... 4000 construction workers adn create 500 permanent jobs. 

ICI and north sea oil  gallon for gallon oil based exports like these will be more profitable for britain than the export of oil itself. 
Drinks pack of the future - Merolite pack - tubular palstic film, stiff paper sleeve, less energy than any conventional alternative, helping to conserve valuable resources. 


(Sowing with out ploughing
Every year Britain's farmers turn ill ions of tons of earth upside down simply to kill weeds. But now there's a new, easier way to clear field - by spraying them with 'Gramoxone' an ICI herbicide. Then seeds can be drilled into the earth without any plodding at all. Known as direct drilling it saves time, labour, money and fuel. It's an agricultural revolution. )

placed also in the Daily Mirror Tuesday July 2, 1974, p6
and the Daily Express July 2 1974  p12

 
 
