Kew_Paraquat_2

Letter to Mr M a S Garrod
Public relations branch
Home Office
Whitehall

We spoke on the telephone yesterday about your request which we received from the consumers Association the latest information on paraquat  and that we should offer Collinswood trust report which they proposed publishing in Which. As agreed I'm enclosing a letter drafted an email deal with it.


the draft, so far as I can see, seems accurate generally and should not cause us any embarrassment, and, infact, may be useful in bringin to the notice of their readers the dangers of irresponsible use of concnetrated paraquat.

Page 2, line 7, deleting substitute from authorised sellers of poisons (i.e. pharmacists) and local authorities listed Sellers of Part two poisons.

Line 13, delete from scheduled to end of paragraph, and substitute listed as a part number to poison and 1933 pharmacy and poisons act. Under the rules made under this act are listed seller of the part number two poisons can only sell paraquat in a closed container as closed by the manufacturer.

Page 4 lines 7-9, delete from beginning of paragraph 2 pouring and substitute the poisons rule prohibits the listed seven parts number two poisons pouring it is concentrated weedkillers.

Line 11, delete from that t note:-there is no legally authorised  user of the substance is approved professional use in agriculture and horticulture, as opposed to amateur use. 

I assume Miss Procter will be clearing her draft also capital Ministry of culture practices pesticides brunch at Ruskin Avenue, Kew, Richmond, Surrey) and she should certainly do so since they are directly concerned with the agricultural use.

As I mentioned to you on 1 March I agreed with Mr Willis that he could confirm to the capital daily capital mail that information that they had obtained regarding proposed further controls on paraquat. was correct. The position is that up at its recent meeting the poisons board agreed to recommend the paraquat should be included in schedule is number one, 5 A to 5B to the poisons rules. The effect of this, if accepted, would be:-

Schedule one a purchaser must be known to the seller to be a person to whom the poison to be properly sold, almost be certified in the prescribed form to be such a person,
(B) before delivering the poison the seller must make an entry into his poisons book which must be signed by the purchaser.

Schedule %A and 5 B explained....

Although we confirmed the Daily Mail's information, so as not to be open to an accusation of non-cooperation, a formal annoncement of the Boar'ds recommendation has not yet been made. We hope to be able to make the announcemtn in a Tra[de otice about the end of April, meantime, I do not thinkg we could withold the information from any other enquirer since the Mail has been given it. 

The Boards rec. will not affect hte exdmptionin schedule 3 to the rules for preoparations ofparaquat in pellet form containing not more than 5% of salts of paraquat calculated as paraquat ion, which includes Weedol. R Kendal 21 March 1973



Dear sir regulations on sale of Paraquat
I refer to an article in farmers weekly March 9 page 57 which mentions a proposal by the poisons board to place paraquat "on the list of most dangerous chemicals".

It also sets out the further conditions of sale which the board wishes to reply to paraquat. We have not to my knowledge yet received any notification of such proposals and I should be glad to know whether this is being done and have a copy of the proposals in detail.

As you realise this chemical is in considerable use in agriculture and we should be most concerned that farmers should be able to obtain it without undue difficulty in so far as it is agricultural use is concerned there has been practically no problems
Yours faithfully PH Easton 
 National farmers union

Letter to Mr Easton
 National farmers union
Agriculture house
Knightsbridge London

Thank you for your letter of 14th of March from which I note that farmers weekly for ninth of March carries mention of proposals for further controls over sale of paraquat.

I think this mention Mr followed from the report of the proposed further controls given by the Daily Mail on second of March and I should explain straightaway that no formal announcement of the proposals has yet been made. The Daily Mail had obtained information from some sort unknown to us and asked us to confirm it, and we thought it better to do so fun to attempt to withhold details open parentheses with the risk, perhaps, of speculation and uncertainty rising) until of formal announcement could be made.

The poison boards proposals are the paraquat should be included in schedules one, 5A and 5B to the poisons rules. Schedule one is the list of the most dangerous poisons in the poisons list. The entry in schedule five they would restrict paraquat to preparations for use in agriculture and horticulture sold by listed sellers of parching poisons and schedule 5B is the list of prisons which Metung may be sold by listed sellers of party poison is policepersons engaged in trade or business agricultural horticulture and for the purpose of that trade or business.  The dangerous poisons which feature improved products for farmers and which are already in schedules one, 5A and 5p on dinitrocresol is common dino said commentary Zaroxolyn, organic compounds of mercury, compound is offensive and organophosphorus compounds, and farmers would have no more difficulty in obtaining power proposed regime of control than they have in obtaining these other poisons.

It maybe some little time left before a's formal announcement poisons board recommendations can be made, as the normal procedures have not yet been gone through, but I shall certainly ensure that you receive a copy when the time comes 

Yours sincerely R Kendall




21st of March 1973
Letter to J Harrison
The patents office
25 Southampton buildings London

Do you Harrison
Thank you for your letter of 14th of March seeking background information on the "moral issue" in the exploitation of paraquat.

Description of the rules associated with different schedules including labelling and packaging.

 It classified the dangers of which are considered the control of the action be applied to the protection of the public as follows space:-
The danger of death or injury following
1) aministration of the poisons criminal purposes
2) the swallowing of a poison in mistake for an innocuous substance
3) information, through ignorance or by accident, of the papers given off by poison
4) incorrect compounding of medicines  containing poison
5) accidental taking into larger dose of medicine containing poison

*So this is 1973 suicide has been legalised supposedly yet suicidal or self poisoning is not counted among these concerns*

Accident ignorance or criminal design those are the key points

I should perhaps make it clear in conclusion that the present poisons no control over paraquat and recommended extension of control and not affected by the page in position. The controls apply equally whether the poison is manufactured by ICI or a dozen firms. Also there is no power in the pharmacy and poisons act to band distribution and use of the substance and it does not fall to the Home Office to consider this question. No statements have been made in Parliament

Home Office minister, and I think it is for the Ministry of agriculture to advise you on government policy on the use of PowerPoint in reply to your query about steps to warn users and the public generally about the dangers of the poison, we have not gone beyond the statutory provision for labelling, and I'm not sure that there is much scope the usual government publicity photograph all the adjectives and publicity over to already given to the news given by the newspapers to Paraquat accidents.  District sales controls recommended by the poisons board will perhaps bring home to purchases more positively the care needed in dealing with para

None of the information in this letter need to be held back from the public mention

I'm sending a copy of this letter and a copy of yours to Litchfield in the Ministry of agriculture as requested 
yours sincerely R Kendall


ICI's petition to the High Court to have their patent rights extended rights will come up soon.

Hated officers policy is to appear in the public interest and they will be represented by counsel with whom consultation has been held 

There is public interest in PowerPoint and the press will be in court. In such cases the courts duty is to balance the benefits to the public against the economical benefits of the appellant.

The court may ask painted office for an opinion and background information they have contacted MAAF pesticides who is providing some information
and he advised of our interest as regards poisons control. 

Mr Harrison said's material on the following lines would be useful:
One what considerations led to the scheduling

To what steps are taken to warn users of its dangerous and to restrict its distribution
Three if a complete ban on supply and use of it has ever been considered if so what factors were taken into account in permitting it to continue to use
For what statements have been made in Parliament on these lines

 
 
 
 
 
 