Lung transplant and paraquat

The Daily Mail reports this as a "first"

But it does not get mentioned as such in the BMJ
Br Med J 1968;3:759
Henry Matthew, Andrew Logan, M. F. A. Woodruff, Brian Heard
Abstract
A 15-year-old boy ingested a mouthful of paraquat and developed severe respiratory distress. Treatment included the transplantation of one lung, but subsequently changes developed in the graft which are thought to have been due to paraquat, and the patient died two weeks after the operation

The dangers of keeping poisonous substances in incorrectly labelled bottles has once again been demonstrated, while the pattern of paraquat poisoning, especially the development of proliferative alveolitis and terminal bronchiolitis, is confirmed.

Immediate forced diuresis followed by haemodialysis is necessary to remove paraquat, thereby perhaps avoiding initiation of the changes in the lungs. The technical feasibility of human lung transplantation has again been demonstrated. It has also been shown that infection does not necessarily pose an insuperable problem, at any rate if, as in the case described, there was no preoperative pulmonary infection in either recipient or donor.

Maybe the Mail was wrong? What does the Times say?

The Times
20 December 1963, p8
18 Days life after lung transplant - US first human to human lung transplantation
June 11 date of operation

Lung transplant given to boy aged 15
Henry Stanhope
The first lung transplant in Europe was performed in the Royal Infirmary Edinburgh on Wednesday. News released in statement from hospital last night. 
(neither paraquat or weedkiller not mentioned in this article) 
3 lung transplants have been carried out previously - 2 in America, one in Japan, both Americans died shortly after. 
operation considered less difficult than heart - rejection is still chief difficulty. 
Edinburgh infirmary - hospital where the country's first kidney transplant took place 8 years ago. 

"Boy with new lung winks at father." Times [London, England] 18 May 1968: 10. The Times Digital Archive.
Paraquat is not mentioned, although a liquid weedkiller is described in the article which details his winking at his father. The Times also says that the bottle was in a locker, although it was a "Kola" bottle. 

20 May 1968 p3 Prayers for lung transplant boy - attended by the boy's father in Edinburgh yesterday. 

29 May 1968 p1
Alex Dan Smith aged 15 from isle of lewis who was Europe's first lung transplant patient died in Ed Royal Infirmary this evening (28 May)

Which historians of medicine/science have been working on transplantation? Do they have anything to say on the subject of reporting? 


http://www.ishlt.org/ContentDocuments/newsletter_Nov2011.pdf
A Personal View on The History of lung Transplantation Professor Paul A Corris

isolated human lung transplantation James Hardy USA
some twenty more years later the Toronto group led by Joel Cooper claimed the first sucessfu clinical examples of isolated lung transplantation and certainly their patietns survived longer nad left the hospital...
Nevertheless, Hardy is usually credited with the important first clinical step in an era when there was no concept of brain stem death, so unbeknownst to him he was also the first to use a DCD donor. Over the 15 yrs after Hardy's success the literature records 40 further attempts all of which failed = primary graft failure, broncial ananstomotic breakdown adn multiorgan failure. 
By late 1970s interest in lung transplantation as a clinical prospect has waned contrasting with major developments in renal, liver and heart transplants

The Glasgow Herald
http://news.google.com/newspapers?id=uG1AAAAAIBAJ&sjid=pqMMAAAAIBAJ&pg=3244%2C3063753
paraquat not named - only weedkiller

Hospital declined to give comment on the operation - medical staff concerned have asked that their confidence with the patient and relatives be respected and no further information will be given. 
It was understood last night that the operation was performed on a 15 yo boy Alex. Smith of 22 Breascleit near Callernish on the Isle of Lewis. His uncle Mr Arthur Maciver said last night that Alex. had had the lung operation on Wednesday. 

4 leading chest surgeons - Mr Logan  Mr RJM McCormack, Mr Philip Walbaum and Mr Wade
Dean of Faculty of Medicine at Edinburgh University - knew the operation was taking place but not closely involved. "The operation involves a prickly new procedure. It could have been performed as a matter of urgency or it could have been a prepared operation. I think it can be pretty definitely concluded that the lung came from the body of a dead person."


On same page is a report based on an article in the BMJ about dramatic success in four open heart operations - at national heart hosp scene of Britain's first heart transplant. All patients well and have returned to their occupations.  

story completed on back page - mentions Infirmaries kidney transplants, the two previous lung transplants in 1963 (patients died) 

there was as much if not more knowledge in Edinburgh of the scientific background of the transplantation of any organ as anywhere else in the world.  Speaking after first heart transplant at National Heat Hosp London

Surgeons were contacted but refused to give details

Great step forward says heart surgeon
senior heart surgeon who has also carried out lung transplants on animals said last night
This is the 1st lung transplant to be carried out in Europe. It is a great step forward on a par with heart trans. as far as helping patients goes. As many people need new lungs as heart, particularly in Scotland where the incidence of crippling lung disease is the highest in the world. 
No details, but the transplanted organ would probably be a homograft, that is from a dead person. Technically less difficult than a heart, the problems of survival immediately afterwards are far greater. rejection process greater danger to lung than other as the membrane of the lung sacs is very delicate, only 2 cells thick in places. 
rejection = thicken
prevents oxygen getting into blood
membrane area covering equivalent of 2 tennis courts - acute problem - no artificial machines for the lung to compare with kidney or liver aids. Patient is depended on remaining lung and the transplant. 
work on the serum - immunosuppressive lymphocytic serum drawn from cells of horses, work also pioneered at Edinburgh by Prof. Woodruff. 


