
27 April 1978
Poison Pot Probe
John Trux and Lee Torrey
following spraying of Mexican marihuana plantations
no authenticated incidents, but clinic reported 3 cases of pulmonary haemorrhage assoc w smoking contaminated weed. 
p in concentrated form is highly toxic. inhalation of p greets greater risk of lung damage than ingestion of an identical amount. 
herbicide invisible odourless and tasteless - harvested crops directly after spraying = no evidence that it contained paraquat. 
Research Triangle Institute, North Carolina
tainted = paraquat enters lungs attached to smoke particles, much was pyrolised into bypyridide, non toxic compound normally present, but some of the herbicide remained. Health Secretary Califano sent warning to nation's marihuana users on 12 March. Cautioned that 3-5 joints each day of heavily congaminated weed for several months result in irreversible lung damage. 
p243
ICI maintains in normal use paraquat sprayed in particles to large to penetrate lungs. But ICI toxicologist told New Scientist I don't know what happens when you expose an animal to paraquat when it is attached to a smoke molecule. Until someone does expos... nobody can be categorical about the risks because this is simply an exposure problem we have not considered. 
levels higher than ICII would expect form normal applications = either using a stronger solution or they're really dumping a lot more on an acre than is recommended. 
Poisons Rules in UK, not sprayed form aircraft. farm use. 
Chris Newbold of the Nature Conservancy 'often mystified when paraquat has gone on meadows. Get a lot of hare feather following paraqat, feeling that it could be far more toxic than is generally appreciated. MAFF handbook ' harmful to animals, leep farm stock away from sprayed areas for at least one day. 

ICI embarrassed - don't like product to get a bad name. 
ICI were consulted by fore the operation, agreed. At the time it wasn't foreseen that people would get hold of the stuff after itt had been sprayed. 
State Department play down marihuana connection " we have made it clear to Congress that our interest in Mexico is for the praying of poppies. However we have not restricted or asked to the Meican govt to concentrate only on poppies. It is their erupt and they use that equipment not only to spray poppies but also to spray marihuana. 

market system - now weed sold as 'home grown' columbian, irrespective of origin. Analysis anonymous service - 75 samples /week to 400 /day. 1/5 have been found contaminated. Reuters reports 39/40 contaminated samples. 




16 August 1984
p6  West Germany bans paraquat
Gramoxone
conservative estimate 1000 people dies each year, half from suicides, half accidental. 
developing countries where sale and use are inadequately controlled. 
Britain = poisons list, chemists and licensed dealers. 
info on health effects  - Industrial Bio-Test laboratories in Illinois. 
dubious quality. 
EPA reviewed data in 1982, inadequate research on repro effects and teratogenecity
inconclusive - mutatgenicity
tests concerning paraquats links to cancer - found that ICI's test was deficient, the other three were by IBT
West Germany - soil, no proof that it is permanently immobilised, ICI argue that even the sandiest soils deactivate large quantities of paraquat. Absorption capacity of most soils is hundred or even thousands of years - said Brian Cox of the co's plant protection [sic] division. Appealing through the courts against this decision. 

New Scientist 1 May 1986
Chemistry beyond the molecule
Howard Colquhoum, Fraser Stoddart and David Williams  (p44 - 48)
p46
herbicides work by 'shorting out' these metabolic pathways. Hence deadly nature by most living things. 
The same electron relaying properties are required by certain elements of photochemical solar energy devices, Hence paraquat is popular as an electron relay among some scientists studying solar energy. 

17 December 86
p23
Lord Cranbrook
serves on the env select committee HoL
no amount of govt effort would suffice if the consumers refused to play their part
issue of lead in petrol - vociferous campaign to get lead-free petrol, to which the govt and industry had responded. But did the public queue up to have its cars converted? not at all. Cranbrook said this showed that ordinary people didn't care about he env as much as the govt did. The cost of such a conversion job on the standard British car a mere £150 "only a few pounds more than you should spend, with wine, in taking your wife out to dinner in London" 

also p22-23
What's jour poison
Brian Price
concerned about the effects of the misuse of chems and the harm caused by illicit pharms, feel a little aggrieved by the idea that toxic substances are fun. (re poison, opium as perfume names). Royal Pharmacueticla Society , low key approach, cannot take action unless product implies that it actually contains poison or controlled drug. Question the thinking behind a marketing ploy that implies that dangerous substances are desirable adjuncts to the boudoir. Opium also suggests the misery of the addict. Plenty of poisonous subs in common use which should be treated with caution rather than levity. Obviously a place for poisons properlyy controlled, but as accessories to seduction they leave much to be desired. Perhaps my concern is as nonsensical as the product naes. Most people can tell the difference between a pesticide and a perfume and are unlikely to dab Paraquat behind their ears in a fit of absent mindedness. But if we are to live in a chemical age, which we do, then surely we should accord such substance the respect they deserve and not use them as the basis of marketing ploys of dubious fast.



