Paraquat history

William Robert Boon
ICI - dyestuffs division Blackley, looking at pharms
mepacrine mfc, penicillin purification and structure determination, then to synthetic drugs and chems for crop protection
Jealot’s Hill Research Stn - biological tests
quaternary ammonium salts tested from specimen colection - one compound now known as diquat stood out. 
Further reserach on related compounds revealed second dipyridylium herbicid - paraquat

Intensive studies by Boon’s group on the mode of action of both diquat and paraquat - rapily destroyed green plant tissue, but lost activity when in contact with soil. Foration of radicals fundamental to action on plants - activated by photosynthetic an respiratory mechs of the plant. 

Serious doubts about possible commercial value - unselective (already marketed selective 2, 4-D and MCPA), soil inactivation good environmentally but could not be soil applied. Little enthusiasm. 

Boon contested this - both these points were strong positives for him in thinking about a revolutionary system of agriculture. 
pyridine and sodium - explosions. Difficulties overcome and compound made at a plant at Widnes. Further research reaction between pyridine and sodium in liquid ammonia. 

Boon retired from ICI in 1973 - nothing is said in this obit about any thoughts towards the use of the chemicals.  It’s a real shame this obit was written by someone who didn’t know him personally. 

Francis Leslie Rose. 27 June 1909-3 March 1988
Author(s): C. W. Suckling and B. W. Langley
Source: Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society, Vol. 36 (Dec., 1990), pp. 490-524
p510 
In the 1960s he and his colleagues made a large number of azapurine derivatives such as triazolopyridazines (XXXII) and triazolopyrazines (XXXIV); one of these (XXXIV), with the same alkyl substitution pattern as that of the earlier preferred isomer (XXXI) was sufficiently active to warrant further trial as a bronchodilator but was, like the earlier compound, rejected because of its tendency to cause emesis. Some years afterwards this property was put to a useful purpose when the compounds were added to liquid Paraquat weedkiller formulations to induce emesis in case of accidental or deliberate swallowing, and so reduce intestinal absorption.



William Charles Evans. 1 October 1911-24 July 1988
Author(s): J. R. Quayle
Source: Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society, Vol. 40 (Nov., 1994), pp. 86-103
investigated the breakdown and fate in soil of herbicides inc paraquat and diquat. Nothing said about human effects. 

 