Title : Case Study Paraquat

Paraquat is one of the trade name that ICI gave to a selective weedkiller that they researched, developed and sent to market. It was initially targeted for agricultural use  and was associated with an entirely new method of cereal planting that did away with ploughing, meaning that areas of land that were usually hard to plough or where soil erosion could be a problem could be brought into fruitful growth. At a time where Britain was trying to rely less on imports, this increased productivity was very desirable. Newspapers reported on the new weedkiller with appropriate national pride at the revolution in farming methods that this heralded. Farming columns in the Times and the Daily Mail regularly mentioned the new weedkiller.

The industrial use of the chemical called for industrial strength concentrations that the farmers would then dilute in their sprayers. This particular preparation had a trade name for agricultural and other large scale use, such as by councils, which was grammoxone. It's strength was 21% and the containers the liquid was sold in carried warnings that it was not to be decanted into other containers as a condition of sale to the farmers or institutions that bought it. 

A couple of years after the introduction of paraquat for agriculture, a new weaker preparation was put onto the market for domestic use under the brand name Weedol. This was sold in the form of granules which were dissolved at home in either a normal watering can or in a dedicated spray bottle. Gardening columns in newspapers and gardening magazines promoted the new chemical as a release from the backbreaking work of weeding. Paraquat began to be included in charts and tables of herbicides and pesticides for every domestic eventuality. A heavy print advertising campaign was launched, which depicted a man in a cable knit jumper, holding a pipe in his mouth, with one hand in his pocket and a watering can in the other. This nonchalant pose, especially when contrasted to the "without Weedol" scenario in which a man is bent over his flowerbed with a hoe, conveyed just how much easier weed control could be, if this product was used. Even with this strong visual message, the adverts carried dense text too, including 

Accidental poisonings occurred when the strong chemical was decanted into soft drink bottles and beer bottles by well meaning users who wanted to use some of the powerful weedkiller for domestic projects. The early poisonings were fatal, even when only a single swig was taken then spat out when the person realised that it tasted wrong. 

These tragic accidents were reported in national newspapers,  with certain phrases becoming almost guaranteed to be used in connection with the chemical "no known antidote". Children had died or become terribly ill and the Daily Mail took it upon themselves to launch an investigation into how easy it was to get hold of the restricted, strong paraquat. They found it alarmingly easy, with few retailers requiring proof, and a conspicuous absence of warnings about decanting or careful use. 

Research into antidotes for paraquat poisoning were occasionally reported in the newspaper. Questions about formulation were raised, and eventually 