Paraquat in Hansard

The chemical name Paraquat first appeared in Hansard in 1970, when Joyce Butler asked whether MAFF would withdraw approval for paraquat following a number of accidents. [*Does this coincide with suicides? or are these simply agricultural /decanting accidents?*] The answer was negative: there was no evidence that the chemical was harmful to workers, when used in accordance to the instructions. This was not the first time that Butler had spoken up in Parliament for users (and victims of) of agricultural and garden chemicals. Butler had been very active throughout the 1960s when DDT, aldrin and dieldrin came under closer scrutiny and public concern. She spoke out vociferously against the government produced booklet *Chemicals for the Gardener*, which contained recommendations to use these chemicals without further information about their persistence, which she argued was necessary should the garden user want to make an informed decision about the wider implications beyond ridding their garden of pests that season. Again, full responsibility was placed on the chemical users to read and obey the information provided by the manufacturer. Butler focused on labelling of these chemicals with information that was relevant and comprehendable to the lay public. During Butler's political career, she would cover water fluoridation, chemical exposure to workers in industry, permitted chemicals in food and cosmetics and their labelling, environmental health, with a keen focus on users and domestic consumers.  She consistently kept the issue of chemicals and consumers in debate, for instance questioning about insecticide use (HC Deb 22 November 1967 vol 754 cc357-8W), progress of regulations (HC Deb 01 May 1968 vol 763 c204W), DDT,  the possibility of a housewives' ombudswoman (HC Deb 24 October 1967 vol 751 c449W) involvemnt of women's organisations with the Consumer Council (HC Deb 07 February 1968 vol 758 cc122-3W). independent scientific advice (HC Deb 24 October 1968 vol 770 c370W) following a variety of incidents where the pet scientific advisor had been significantly wrong (Bognor Regis sewage, radiation fallout following tests), lead pollution in water and in the air. 

Butler represented Wood Green, which was later classed as Harringey. As an urban area, there wasn't any agriculture or therefore crop spraying happening and no major chemical industry. Butler felt very strongly about intensive farming methods and environmental pollution, both of which were strongly related to consumer issues, repeatedly calling for joined up thinking and better links between Government departments. She described herself as a housewife, although it was no ordinary household she was part of - her husband was a Labour candidate for Rutland but of the pair she was the more politically mobile, and influential, as a member of Wood Green Council, becoming council leader in 1954 then deputy mayor before becoming elected in 1955 as an MP for the Labour Party.  She was willing and able to speak confidently and knowledgably on technical scientific subjects, keeping abreast of research and policy development in the United States and passing material on for review to the relevant UK government body. 

Paraquat was a revolutionary aid to farming, boosting the nation's total area of productive land, set to gaurantee riches to the UK's chemical industry. When there started to be accidents and incidents with agricultural workers who for whatever reason were not using adequate protective equipment,  or perhaps not being given relevant information about hazards associated with the chemical, pressure and media exposure from farm workers unions (REF) who wanted to improve workers health and safety at work, were reported in newspapers, but it was not raised by name in Parliament [Check that it wasn't called by its proper name, grammoxone].

What tipping point was reached in 1970? Is this when injury not associated with the act of mixing or spraying, when the site of poisoning becomes domestic?

Asking that approval should be revoked, instead of an inquiry launched or health and safety proceedures reviewed, looks like a knee-jerk or over-reaction in this instance, and an inflexible answer was given accordingly. Butler did not appear as a participant in further discussions about paraquat, but the weedkiller remained a topic of frequent questioning until the 1980s, with figures on deaths attributed to the chemical being regularly requested by a number of MPs. There was even a prisoner suicide using the weedkiller, though there was never any comment recorded about how he came to obtain the lethal dose. 

Deliberate self-poisoning using paraquat quickly overtook accidental poisonings as the major factor in deaths. No longer could the standard answer that the chemical was harmless when used correctly hold up, when it was obvious that a substantial section of these users were not agricultural workers involved in herbicide spraying. The existing restrictions on licenced sellers, decanting agricultural paraquat, very rarely called by its trade name Gramoxone in either parliamentary debates or newspaper reports, were stressed and other legislative measures such as ???? were raised. Echoing other discussions on the formulation of sodium chlorate weedkiller in an attempt to reduce explosions, often involving children, potential tweaks to formulation of paraquat preparations were discussed in parliament, as were labelling and packaging. The argument came down to the limits of government intervention and personal responsibility. When the formulation of paraquat was altered to include a chemical to make it smell noxious, a dye to make it less similar to the dark brown of cola [DATES], it was not raised in parliament. [*Does the frequency of occurence of paraquat decrease as these measures are implemented? Does the focus shift to accidents relating to transport and storage?*]

MPs and Peers took it upon themselves to investigate; buying paraquat, noting whether warnings were given by the seller or on the container, experiencing for themselves whether the information on the containers was hard to read, or easy to understand. A number of the participants in the parliamentary debates involving paraquat had experience of farming themselves, and were aware of the benefits of paraquat when used correctly as well as the tragic outcomes when it was not used as intended. Whether through mis-speaking, misunderstanding or absence of facts, Hansard records some continuing confusion about the appearance, availability and differences between agricultural and domestic paraquat preparations, so where personal experiences could be called upon they lent credibility and force to the arguments presented by those involved [REF]. 



When paraquat was banned in West Germany [DATE] after tests suggested that ICI's claims that the chemical's activity was neutralised quickly when it bound to soil should be challenged, it prompted more questions in parliament about whether paraquat should be allowed in the UK [REF]. With research in intensive farming methods, including antibiotic use and resistance in animals ahead of what was happening in the UK, Germany was a trail blazer in the organic farming and food movement. The awareness of potential long term effects on humans, consumers, as well as for the animals themselves put West Germany in a position to be emulated. [REF Claas?] However, the answers given in parliament show more concern for the trade implications of orders not being placed, than with investigating whether the substance does remain active on some soil types longer than expected. Repeated questioning about the Ministry of Agriculture's own tests at its research farm did not reveal any conclusive answers in this setting. Paraquat was deemed to be too valuable both as an aid to Britain's efforts to feed itself, and as a commodity exported worldwide, to publically express any doubt in one of the key promotional statements about the chemical made by ICI.  It had been known well before these German tests, that paraquat was not activated as fast on peat and sand as it was by clays.  

	[What else can I find out about these tests, and the kind of pressure that was perhaps on ministers with regard to economics?]
	
	
The concerns expressed in these debates are centered on economics and safety. Paraquat was an extremely effective weedkiller and the agricultural background that MPs and Peers came from personally, or represented constitutionally, were important in their arguments, as was the ability of Britain to produce enough affordable, safe food for a growing population. Jobs and income depended on the continued demand for paraquat in Britain and abroad, meaning that the MP for Widnes where ICI's paraquat factory was located appeared regularly in debate about the chemical. 

ICI's might as a company was admired, they spent a great deal on research, employed thousands of people accross the country, generated income and ICI's claims about product safety were never explored in this forum; the Pesticides Committee dealt with these issues in relative privacy. The strength of trade unions does not come through in these arguments, but safety organisations and committees, the Pesticides Review board (?) the British Council for Safety, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents and the Health and Safety Executive were frequently referred to for figures and guidance, or in the case of the pesticides review committee held up as the entire safety provision. The co-operation and relationships between these groups, the networks, connections and dynamics between members of these groups are not always clear from the discussions recorded in Hansard, though Butler expresses frustration at how they could work better together, with reference to the recommendations made in the "disastrous" Chemicals for the Gardener booklet (HC Deb 26 March 1964 vol 692 cc756-70) where outdated information (the chemicals had already been deemed dangerous) was provided. [This could do with more research - who are the key figures in these groups? This might be in the Archives at Kew in the paraquat folder, or if there are Pesticde board records]

Newspaper reports went into much more detail about the individual cases of accidents involving paraquat than the debates in Parliament did, and the debates were clearly reactions to recent occurences in constituencies. Newspapers followed murder cases with even more enthusiam than accidental child poisoning, but this use is barely mentioned in Hansard, with accidental poisoning and deliberate self poisoning of most concern. The Scottish case was remarked on because of concern for the justice those mentioned in a potential paraquat murder case, rather than the fact that the herbicide was used deliberately to harm someone. When death figures are given, where an accident or suicide was unclear, it was noted as such.

Chemical accidents that affected a wider group of people, such as explosions in storage depots or tankers shedding a load, were referred to in passing, sometimes as an illustration of where more legislation was needed with regard to town planning. Investigations were carried out by the relevant groups associated Bhopal was not explicitly mentioned in these debates, but Flixborough and Salford were.  TV programes were not mentioned despite a number of educational and investigative documentaries such as Horizon on chemical accidents and the need for pesticides in agriculture which could have been expected to have been influential, though Rachel Carson's silent spring did crop up in some of the early discussions [who? when?]. Silent Spring was not invoked during the 1970s or 80s. [check]

Animal testing, specifically on primates of diquat and paraquat acute toxicity and treatment, exercised Lord Houghton of Sowerby who by then was the vice president of an animal charity and spoke on many animal welfare issues. Another occurence of paraquat in conjunction with animal welfare was in the debates on hare coursing, with the herbicide named as one of the other ways that hares are killed by humans. In 1990, it was stated that exhaustive tests by MAFF had failed to find any link between paraquat use on crops and hare deaths, positing that deaths could be attributed to a virus. 	Pets and wild birds were not mentioned in relation to paraquat poisoning, though wild birds might have been affected by habitat/food disruption? [check]


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	