Testing Paraquat

#Laboratory testing
Paraquat had been discovered in 1955, then tested over the intervening seven years. This length of time does not seem to have been commented on in the press or the toxicology papers available in journal. It will require further historical research to establish whether this length of testing is usual. The TV documentary Pesticides or Posterity describes some of the tests that go on, Edson says over three or four years of work, which include safety to the manufacturers and appliers of the chemicsl, and residue feeding on animals. He states that even after all these tests that a true picture of what happens can only be obtained after the material is out in the field for another two or three years. Out in the field here means used under normal conditions, whcih although as probably precise, due to farmers and gardeners not wanting to waste the product, but to use enough to be effective, but normal as in some of the carelessness that comes with using a technology that one doesn't fully understand.  It was only after there started to be skin and nail effects in users that the PPE statement was readjusted to say why it should be worn. (was this paraquat  - or was this 2,4D? It doesnt' matter if it wasn't paraquat, it still illustrates the example quite nicely). This was 1964, two years after paraquat had been introduced to the market place, but still two years before poisonings started being reported?

The testing of paraquat seems to have focused on the herbicidal effectiveness, understanding how rapidly it became inactivated when binding to certain soil types, susceptibility to rain, method of uptake by plants. This was all done through improvised methods, because the sophisticated techniques that would confirm these things, or perhaps resolve in greater detail some of these things at a later date, had not yet become available, they hadn't been developed  themselves. See the Jealotts Hill book for details on this. 

Residues that might have been ingested on crops grown on land treated with paraquat were tested, with an absurd figure of 15 tonnes of diquat treated potatoes for a pig to be affected standing in to show how unlikely normal human consumption would injest harmful amounts of the herbicide.  Potatoes are an interesting choice here, as being a tuber, rather than the top most part of the plant, they are surrounded by soil, which paraquat binds to and becomes inactivated by. Paraquat is also transported down from the leaves to the rootes of the treated plant, otherwise the plant would regrow. No discussion is had in Hansard, or so far anywhere else, about whether this is a relevant test. 

Fatefully, Edson says taht even a safe chemical will probably at somepoint be so misused and cause trouble, that "it's one of those fact of life". Here he says that it is an "inevitable risk that the community has just got to face up to". Which community is he referring to? The community of researchers? Or the communities of users? How would we find this out. I'll ask Tim what he thinks. If he means wider community of users, then this is placing some responsibility on people to not misuse it. It also suggests that companies shoul be more imaginative abou tthe ways that the chemicals they make could be misused. Not thinking that someone would drink it, and therefore not testign for acute toxicity seems quite naive. 

This raises questions about the practices of testing - how far do you go? Someone must have written about these industrial processes - ICI history? What regulations are associated and when where they introduced? What papers will be available in the National Archives? 

#Animal testing
There were animal tests done on acute toxicity, but only after there were fatal human poisonings? Animal testing at the time that paraquat was developed was not legislated in the same way that it is now. Although the economics of unnecessary volume or repetition of testing would have curtailed this, that it was not yet enshrined in law suggested to non-practicioners at least, that the issue should be addressed. Animal testing carried out with laboratory models such as rats are held up as irrelevant to humans by non-scientists, "rat doctors" aka lab scientists were deemed not good enough by Paddy Ashdown, who also had a problem with pathologists, assuming that they only dealt with dead bodies, when what he was focused on was the living, suffering human and their need to be treated sucessfully. [Ashdown saw active service as an army officer in Malaysia,  were defoliants or any chemical agents used in this conflict? Where was he representing at the time he made these statements]  Primate testing is emotionally provocative too, becasue of their similiarity to humans, as well as their difference. 

Animal poisoning, either domestic pets, farmed animals or wild animals, was not mentioned in relation to use of the herbicide on farms, though it was anecdotally linked with brown hare deaths. This link was exposed during the protracted hare coursing debates in parliament. This has echoes of earlier discussions of pesticide use in agriculture, with the number of wild birds being threatened by poisoning. Hunting rather than straight forward animal welfare was the reason for the point being made at this level. 

Animal welfare has been earmarked as a particularly British trigger for action by that man who talked abou tthe poisoning episode associated with the Rentokil factory. The ambiguity surrounding animal testing for the majority of the public, with respect to this type of product and the repeated statement that there was no antidote to this poisonous substance implying that tests should, had to be, done in order to save huamn lives, was possibly a reason why the public were not mobilised on this issue in any great number. 

The lack of precision associated with dealing with human poisoning events, both with knowing how much had been ingested, or absorbed through the skin either from imprecise or ill remembered accounts from the patient as well as the difficulty associated with lack of fast and reliable quantitative assays, and the variability of treatment that people recieved, how they responded to it,  as well as their own embodiment of symptoms, meant that it was hard to quickly draw up a plan for successful treatment plan. Discovering the mode of fibrosis in the lungs was a vital point in understanding, as the solidification of the lungs was focused on in media reports of paraquat poisonign. The slow death caused by the chemical made for good drama and follow up opportunity. In an early case of accidental child poisoning that the Daily Mail reported on, remarked on the fact that the patient had been watching television in hosptital, and ushered away so that he wouldn't see the report on another small child who had died of the same accident. For his parents it was a waiting game. 

