By writing about the use of chemicals in the home, something that appears to have been so mundane that it has not actually been written at any length about it previously, I intend to contribute to filling this glaring ommission. The place of chemicals and chemical products cannot continue to be debated in terms of chemophobia and chemophila, or even chemo-ambivalence if there has not been a systematic, or at least detailed study of user behaviours and attitudes to domestic chemicals. Merely regurgitating a vague and evidence-free statements about domestic chemical use, or attitudes to chemicals, without seriously investigating how these attitudes came about, what contributes to the  ideas people form about chemicals, is irresponsible and disrespectful to the users and nonusers of chemicals. It is irresponsible to not seek to understand, and it is disrespectful because it does not listen to why people choose to use chemicals, whilst other concernerd non-users steal the stage with their protests about long term environmental and health damages. The best way to understand how users view themselves, in terms of responsibility and agency which are both important in the way that chemicals are both chosen and used withtin the  restrictions imposed upon them by laws, is to ask those users about what they think or thought, in conjunction with looking at the available documentary evidence remaining. This layered approach can help to form a version o fthe total picture, perhaps a mosaic or patchwork, which at least gives all those concerned a voice, rather than prioritising the chemical industry or any of the other actors. The sailience of the projcet is that chemicals are always being discovered, or rediscovered, and so are fears about them. To better deal with crises of confidence, or accusations of dishonesty, it is useful to have a map of what has ahppened before, which factores improved matters, which exacerbated it, as well as a reminder that attention runs in cycles and that even when a topic seems to be dominating the entire mindset of a nation, that something else will push the all consuming worry off its pedestal and be replaced with a nother, new or forgotten and reworked problem. The benefits of doing this work are that museums ofbranding, as well as sicence and technology, will be highlighted as useful reminders of the best practice in keeping ojbects, as well as reminders to people about the ways that they used to have them. The books that casually advise mixing vats of poisons to create receipes are laughed at now, but they contained serious, useful advice to servants and housemasters for all the land. 