vickery Women and the World of Goods 1994 - check OBx lib


p27 of thesis Feminist history and gender studies - neglected garden or reversed gender stereotype of suburban garden space to present it as a masculine preseve. Not easy to make this distincion. Ties between inside and out are so strong that you cannot separate entirely. 

Davidoff and Hall’s Family Fortunes: Men and Women of the English Middle Class  1987  underpins many accounts of the “domestic sphere”. 

p34 Quotes Davidoff et al 1976 Landscape with Figures (p153) : “Thrugh the middle class and in respectable working-class homes, the front privet or iron fence, whitened doorsteps, clean cutains and shining brass door furniture presented the household to “the World”. 

REfers to Constantine (!981)

suggests garden allowed for easy interaction of masculinity with domesticity. Gardening offered benefit os exercise, light and air. Place for learning. Botany and natral history were popular amateuar activities, connected easily with passion for gardening. Amateur scientists might practice at home iwth ease and evidence suggests that they did so avidly. Knowledge shared with family, friends and sometimes wideer audience. Moral education of children undertaken outside. Children free to play, dig and plant their own patch. Garden also a place to do nothing, to rest and think. 

p68 gardening as creative art form requiring taste and sensitivity. Horticulture was presented [by gardening mags The Garden, Gardening, Gardening Illustrated published from 1870s til WW1] as mechanical science practised by professional gardeners whose outdated and overly-rigid ideas were unresponsive to the genius of the place. 

Lady Grances Wolseley’s Glynde School for Lady Gardeners founded in 1900 in Sussex. 

p72 large staffs of gardeners became increasingly anachronistic in the domestic environmenta, professional, technical magazines either folded or redirected their efforts to attracting the burgeoning class of amateus who dug for pleasure rather than profit. 

p73 Loudon had introduced his Gardener’s Magazine by declaring that horticulture was an art of peacetime which could not thrive under conditions of war, a comment meant as much in spirtual terms as economic terms. 

Discussion of mags content seems to be focused on plans of gardens and planting schemes/ choices/ designs. Importance of taking the local environment into account - in terms of climate and pollution affecting the sucess of the garden.   Gardens in Towns Protection Bill and Smoke Act 1865 - make plant cultivation easier. 

p83 modernity signified by gaudiness of bright plants, hybrids, ingenious grafting giving upright/standard roses

p  neighgourly cause and effect - over the fence sharing of plants and designs. 

p221 recommended Cuero Guano (bird manure) 1858 - available in refined and manageable form. “for use among all amateur florists, esp in the greenhouse and conservatory, wher enothing unclean or offensive may intrue; indeed, such is its nature in these respects that a lady may keep a bottle of it in her chiffonier or owrok table drawer and appl it to her floral pets, at her drawing room wind, without soiling her fingers or offendin gher sense o f smell. (Floral World 1 (5) 104)

p222 Mrs Loudon wrote comprehensively and plainly on the chemical and cultuarl characteristics of fermented horse and coy dung, pigeon droppings and more exotic guano, and of bone dut, night-soil compunds prepared in Paris or imported from China, and oth erht benefits of ready putrefied liquid manure from the draiings of dunghouses.  Loudon was concerned with the garden proper, set apopart from the house. She would not have mentioned these for conservatory culture. Separation  -concerns for health (disase conveyed by odour) 

All sorts of gardening were appropriate for women ‘ for a genuine love for flowers promotes the love of home’.The keeping of a good garden was, like the upkeep of the interior, evidence of an upright household. Thus was just as true of the ‘middling sort’ as it was the poor household. ‘gardening makes men domestic’

Rhodedendrons, hydrangeas, heathers  = awareness of alkalinity/ acidity of soil and how to alter it

labour saving gardens/ planting styles - cottage garden, propagate selves, not particular about soil. hardy exotic plants that will take care of themselves. 

p315 Cobbet suggested it ws unpatriotic as well as unproductive to favour science over labour. *Rural Rides* William Cobbett 1830
industrial corruption - blame influence of showy dyes and coloured cottons promoted by chemists and decorators Robinsson. Technology in this sense means breeding, hybrids, selction and grafting






