Gardeners and Herbicides
Reverse outline


1. recap household chapter, expanding number of products in both arenas
2. why chosen herbicides for this chapter, mention which chemicals
3. what herbicides can show about brand names, proprietary mixtures, chemicals and their manufacturers.
4. function of garden, why weed
5. who weeds, why weed/ motivation entertainment
6. why weed/ motivation patriotic duty
7. chemicals help gardening as leisure, necessary after stresses of war
13. regulation - Pharmacy and Poisns Act/ Rules
14. arsenic - should clarify the poisons rules effects on gardeners here really
15. PSPS,focus on farmworkers but as domestic used same chemicals, useful for them too
16. PSPS in more detail, did not invovle consumer reps
17. poor representation of users a problem, but couldn't committee members also be users and stand in for them?
18. PSPS safety 
19. impact on domestic users, logo
20. Chemicals for the Gardener, labelling and instructions
21. Farm and Garden Chemicals Act 1967, Europe, PSPS had greater influence
22. Farm and Garden Chemicals emphasised users
23. Users had different requirements for improved labelling 
24. Buying garden chemicals through self service, where some were marketed as gifts.
25. Questions how garden chemicals as consumables were gifts, but not herbicides. Aimed towards children
26. table 1 summary comparison - not integrated
-----------------------
27. Sulphate of ammonia most important
28. ammonium sulphate as a product of coal gas industry, lawn sand was well established product by 1930s
29. Branded lawn sand  1870, won awards 1913-14
30. lawn sand (functional) over ammonium sulphate (chemical), invisibility
31. Identity of lawn sand uncovered, recipes appear from 1922
32. lawn sand recipes ubiquitous, personalised to user if necessary
33. Quantities of commercial lawnsand, relationship to use. 
34. Measuring lawnsand for spot weeding - pinch, salt spoon full, gadgets for applying it
35. No adverts from manufacturers of ammonium sulphate, but lawn sand continued to be popular
36. longevity of lawnsand, reliable effective and safe. 
------------------------
37. Sodium chlorate - origns in farming, Chipman Chemical profile
38. Chapman chemical on railways, longevity suitable 
39. Not poisonous, keenly promoted as such
40. NAS promotion to domestic users - first to do so (?)
41. NAS members found sodium hard to get at first as it was manufactured abroad, then in Britain
42. NAS packaged sodium chlorate for domestic users, but why not branded Atlacide?
43. NAS as intermediary, then Plant Protection (Atlacide) in 1939 and Boots own sc
44. Differences in packaging and making own concentration/use dry allowed users freedom to use chemical as they wished 
45. Adverts discussed, manufacturing companies as retailers direct
46. Lack of A symbol, it only applied to new products and sodium chlorate not a new chemical
47. Fire/ burns - not linked in properly
48. danger of fire preferable to poisoning, fire retardants more widely used in agriculture than domestic
49. EC oxidising/ flammable
50. For domestic users, accidental damage to plants through creep more likely than fire
51. deliberate damage to plants through vandalism was rare
52. sodium chlorate subject to prohibited chemicals in 1939, restricted amounts sold
53. Subject to whims, prohibition not really upheld
54. prohibition not widely communicated, but there were other problems with supply. 
55. War to entertainment, sabotage to child safety
56. Parliamentary activity concerning safety of children re cs
57. fire depressants marketing
58. Protection of children prioritised over political bomb making, effectiveness of weedkiller
59. Recommend teachers leave out explosions, chemistry set explosions
60. How to prevent sales of sc to not gardeners (i.e. children)?
61. stealing from home supplies (vs purchasing by children)
62. Home made explosives for revenge and terrorism
63. IRA professionals - not really homemade, Angry Brigade less organised, home made
64. Restrict sale to Northern Ireland
65. accidental explosions in residential areas through industrial storage not shake domestic confidence in weedkiller
66. During terrorist uses, no calls for fire depressants, as there had been when children had been subject of concern
67. Poisoning with sodium chlorate was possible, though often unsucessful as portrayed through mainstream media.
68. Only find evidence of successful poisoning with this nonpoisonous chemical in medical journals
69. Remained on market until 2009,  
70. but still available.
---------------------------
71. Paraquat context of use given, manufacture explained, quickly gained a reputation as killer chemical
72. formal name shows that it is very different to straight forward sodium chlorate.  Refer to timeline of activity 
73. why develop paraquat? different use scenario to sodium chlorate
74. v short para - Boon focused on agricultural revolution, though domestic version was pencilled in early
75. formulation  - revolution, Gramoxone liquid, planned to scale down with Weedol
76. Influence of PSPS meant that ICI were pressured to make WEedol a granule, less freedom for user
77. toxicologial data to PSPS, expected humans to clear better than rats
78. Clearance of Weedol, first users were ICI staff, ACAS logo
79.  Accidents with Gramoxone only occurred after two faultless years, related to two instructions. 
80. Roy Goulding - labelling, ICI did not want to label it poison, might put people off
81. Gramoxone was put onto the Poisons List in Augsut 1968
82. Gramoxone sold through limited number of outlets, voluntarily. Responsibility of retailer to prevent sales to domestic users
83. Not all retailers were strict, decanted/repackaged
84. needed to reach allotment societies, source of repackaged -not labelled Alex Smith lung transplant
85. allotment society but clearly labelled, suicide
86. too short - merge rewrite with above about regret
87. Not necessary for domestic users to decant Gramoxone as WEedol was available widely, heavily advertised.
88. Explained that WEedol was not on the Poisons List, investigative reporting demonstrated how easily Gramoxone was obtained
89. Gramoxone reclassified - sign a book, easily circumvented
90. Retailers police availability of Gramoxone, householders certificate not very effective measure as anyone could get this
91. Media reports focussed on no known antidote
92. Paraquat used preferentially to brand names
93. Advertising Gramoxone
94. Agricultural users had different motivations to domestic users
95. Summarises table of advertisements
96. describes emphasis on saved time and effort, expense, equipment, who it was for
97. advertising through different papers reached different audiences
98. advertising models users, ICI targeted middle aged, middle class
99. Stand up to weeds - user depiction
100. Two ways to weed - user depiction
101. significance of pipe, weedkiller as nonthreatening to tradition
102. v short para - harmless to wildlife
103. celebrity user Percy Thrower / evangelist
104. evangelists in newspapers/ magazines
105. mundanity, low key - merge with 101?
106. Majority of users followed instructions and came to no harm, describes disobedient/non compliant users actions
107. unsuspecting users - mistaken identity
108. effect on lung tissues
109. treating poisoning - experimental, so mainstream media focussed on lack of antidote
110. disjointed - farmers as group of users believed to be more competent at handling toxic chemicals than domestic users
111. workplace theft - Beverly Pollitt in1968
112. Weedol expensive, Gramone represented better value
113. v short para - not a typical portrait of domestic gramoxone use
114. irresponsible users publicly condemn by authority figures
115. accidental deaths of all ages, but safety of children portayed as most at risk. 
116. Weedol very few accidents, only due to carelessness and did not put people off using it. 
117. Consequences of disobeying advice that paraquat was not to be taken, despite Weedol's promotion as harmless
118. Suicide not mentioned by mainstream press until 1972 (had been happening since 1968), media promoted this use by showing how easy Graomxone was to obtain
119. Murder, prompted by newspaper
120. Paraquat appearing in main sections of newspaper due to harms, not weeding. Suicide not glamorised (contraditcting 118?) but graph to show  progression from accidental to deliberate
121. Newspapers as educating public about dangers of paraquat. 
122. Users are hard to control, had to make product harder to misuse accidentally
123. Gramoxone stenching agent and emetic added
124. Packaging of Gramoxone, learn from Japan, not reformulate Gramoxone as granules. 
125. Colour of Gramoxone, echoed previous strategies for preventing accidental poisoning with arsenic and strychnine
126. Weedkillers promoted as non paraquat - show that segment were believed to want to avoid this, but the descriptions shows that the qualities were nothing like paraquat
127. demand for paraquat meant not displaced, users not shaken / ambivalent/ conficent in their own common sense
128. demand for rapidly broken down them paved way for Glyphosate, not advertised with reference to paraquat
-----------------------------
129. I really ought to find oral histories/ testimonies
130. misuse of chemicals perpetuated by knowledge becoming widely known through mainstream media
131. when chemicals were promoted as harmless, but were not, what happens?
132. single manufacturer of paraquat could be held to blame, whereas multiple manufacturers of sodium chlorate were harder to vilify
133. expectations of misuse, predicted but hard to control
134. weeding made more skilful by addition of chemicals - choose appropriate one for the situation, apply it correctly. Nowhere was chemical use equated with modernity through science.
135. price of herbicides, non essential item, limited availability to group of users. 
136. Percieved competence of users, as seen by PSPS committees and also by themselves
137. Obvious differences between professional and amateur product puts users at risk
138. A branded product becoming known by its chemical name not unknown. 
139. Children used to show ease, safety, but vulnerable to adults behaviours.

to add to conclusions
quantities are an important in use, if a domestic user cannot get a suitable size they cannot use the product. Size signals value for money. Size signals use, as in the case of Japan. 

environmental regrets not an argument made regarding these weedkillers, where negative purely affects humans. 

entering market at different eras = subject to different regulation

mixed messages - fertilise/ kill, poisonous to weeds, harmless to people picture of skull





