
Paraquat was a herbicide developed by ICI and after provisional approval from the PSPS it was introduced to the British market in two different forms: Gramoxone, a strong agricultural concentrate in 1964, and a less concentrated granule version, Weedol for home gardeners in 1965. 

What was the PSPS?
The PSPS process has been described as flexible, with individual personal relationships playing a major part in smoothing the way. Plenty of guidance meant that companies which put products forward for scrutiny rarely had them rejected outright. The PSPS could substantially change the presentation of a product, as demonstrated by their insistence on a granular form of paraquat for domestic users. It was true that this form was less likely to be mistaken for any edible substance although their concern had been to avoid splashing the corrosive liquid, but the extra development time and costs subsequently passed onto the gardeners meant that the cheaper liquid concentrate for professionals was appealing for some who wanted what they perceived to be better value.

How were users involved in regulation?
Members of the Scientific Subcommittee stood in for users: they imagined their behaviours and reviewed material relating to user experiences. For instance, nosebleeds that workers had after packing the dusty granulated Weedol concerned the panel of experts, but they were satisfied when better ventilation and consistent use of protective masks stopped them.  The panel knew that putting chemicals in drinks bottles was already a problem, so ICI included a warning on Gramoxone's label to users to never repack or decant the chemical.

Users became more involved in regulation when it became evident that Gramoxone was extremely acutely toxic to humans. The animal models chosen for toxicity tests metabolised paraquat differently to humans. A clear pattern emerged from the accidental deaths. They were all related to the concentrate being put into a beverage bottle, then mistakenly ingested. Representatives of professional users, The National Farmworker's Union, felt that the labelling did not adequately describe how serious the consequences of misuse were. 

 ICI resisted including the word 'Poison' on Gramoxone's label, believing it would put people off using it. As the number of poisonings by Gramoxone mounted, media attention began and there were calls for paraquat to be banned. Experts weighed the benefits of a highly effective weedkiller which could easily be used safely against the small number of deaths which happened when people disobeyed instructions for safe use. [image of balance beam giving figures/date?] Gramoxone was included on Poisons List which meant it had to carry a label declaring it as a poison, then later it was reclassified as a more dangerous poison. 
 
Being on the poisons list meant that the buyer would be aware of its potentially lethal effects, but nothing more. Those who were truly determined to illicitly buy the chemical entered false addresses in the register, or simply did not care. These people were not likely to be using it as intended, but doing the opposite of the warning "not to be taken". 

How was regulation communicated to users?
Gaining approval from the PSPS meant that products were entitled to use a symbol on their packaging and in their advertising. This symbol had been widely promoted to home gardeners and professional farmers by the Ministry of Agriculture. Many people had been alarmed by widespread wildlife deaths related to seed dressings and road verge treatments, even before the publication of Rachel Carson's Silent Spring, so were grateful for some guidance. 

The media also communicated how regulation worked and when changes occurred. Although care was taken to explain that Weedol was not included in the Poisons List, some people were remained confused because they were unaware that there were different formulations of paraquat. Journalists and presenters inconsistently discussed Weedol and Gramoxone, favouring the generic name paraquat. Gardeners were left puzzled why celebrity gardeners recommended paraquat when it was also associated with terrible deaths. Investigative journalists showed how easy it was to illicitly acquire Gramoxone. Media coverage was blamed for the large number of suicides using this chemical, and murderers even cited news articles as their inspiration for using paraquat as a poison. On the positive side, media can be credited with raising the general awareness of problems associated with inappropriate storage of household chemicals, as well as publicising how the manufacturer responded to make safer products.