poster version 3

Consumers, the people who willingly buy and use chemicals, are an important part of the story of living in a toxic world. This poster shows how regulation of chemical products destined for domestic consumers was communicated through books, newspaper and magazine stories, product packaging and adverts.

In 1957, the Pesticide Safety Precautionary Scheme and the Agricultural Chemicals Approval Scheme impacted domestic users, as all new chemical preparations had to first pass the PSPS, then the ACAS before being marketed. This graphic symbol "A" signalled to consumers that the chemicals they chose for use in their gardens had been approved through these processes. 
[image]
It appeared on packaging and also in advertisements, as well as in books. "Chemicals for the Gardener" produced in 1963 was a plain-English government publication produced by the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries (MAFF) directed to home gardeners which publicised the safety schemes, and the names of branded products which had been approved. 

This booklet was not well received. The public had demanded something that addressed safety concerns following the deaths of wildlife associated with application of agrochemicals to fields and roadside verges and growing unease with aldrin, dieldrin and DDT. However, the booklet recommended these three chemicals without commenting on their unwanted effects. This mismatch between public concern and what information was offered did not get the system off to a good start.
[image?]
Joyce Butler, MP for Wood Green London, argued strongly and successfully for the booklet's revision to include information about the safe and appropriate use of garden chemicals. Butler capitalised on her persona of "housewife", despite being a highly professional politician for almost all her adult life, by consistently researching and promoting measures that elevated consumer choice and safety. After this success Butler continued her interest in chemicals and consumers, going on to champion the 1967 Farm and Garden Chemicals Act. This  focussed on clear labelling which consumers had often highlighted as a problem. However, what consumers wanted to see on labels and what politicians and chemical companies thought they *should* see differed somewhat.

 This can be observed in gardeners' "hacks" as they would be called now which focussed mainly on solving the problem of illegibly small writing, as well as the tension between the type and relevance of safety information, such as chemical names and hazards. 
 [image]
 For instance, the herbicide and occasional bomb making ingredient sodium chlorate had always been described to domestic users as flammable or inflammable, but when it was assigned an EC-wide hazard symbol, it received "oxidising" which is the correct chemical term, but not one that gardeners were the most familiar with.  Another example is that based on the number of people who died after ingesting the agricultural weedkiller paraquat, the chemical was clearly poisonous but there was extremely strong resistance from the chemical company suggestions that they should put this information on the label for their less concentrated domestic product. 

After the embarrassing MAFF publication for gardeners, the British Agrochemicals Association took firmer control of the presentation of chemical products and their regulation to domestic users. They still referred to MAFF, with its associated authority but did not focus on diagnosing pest problems and prescribing chemicals. Instead it produced a directory listing the active chemicals in branded garden products along with reminders of responsible use and disposal. The PSPS and ACAS processes were briefly, described and the suggestion of industry openness was provided through the contact information supplied for those who were motivated to seek further information. 

Despite the emphasis on new, stronger, better, more precise synthetic chemicals, gardeners still used old, tried and tested but not formally evaluated chemicals such as sodium chlorate. These were included in the information booklets and directories, and their use featured regularly in garden advice columns, but they could not carry the "A" symbol. Gardeners, and politicians, did not demand that these older chemicals be examined, even when they had drawbacks such as poisoning, causing fires or being used in bombs, but newly synthesised chemicals appeared to occupy a new realm, calling for a new kind of reassurance. For these chemicals, entering the marketplace when awareness of unknown long term negative effects on bodily and environmental health had been pushed into the public consciousness, a system which promised to take the place of years of experience, when dealing with these strange new products was accepted.  

Contrary