Cat Rushmore 12010923@brookes.ac.uk  @catrushmore

This poster looks at some of the weedkillers that gardeners in Britain have used between 1930 and the 1980s. Those products have been regulated by processes and acts designed to protect gardeners from chemicals, but also users from themselves. This is principally due to acute toxicity, with persistent chemicals and their effects being curiously overlooked, although attitudes were certainly shifting at this time and people were becoming concerned with unknown, long term consequences.

Some weedkillers like ammonium sulphate, which is incorporated into lawn sand is practically impossible to misuse and cause harm to anything. In contrast sodium chlorate was always described as non-poisonous and paraquat was advertised as harmless when used according to manufacturers instructions. Users of these chemicals on the whole experienced them as such, with varying degrees of success at weedkilling depending on their individual needs. A minority of people appear compelled to disregard such words to do with safety, to read between the lines or behave in the opposite way to how it was suggested they ought. Through deliberate behaviours it became apparent that disregarding the precautions for sodium chlorate and paraquat could be fatal.

Paraquat was developed by ICI and after approval from the PSPS it was introduced to the British market in two different forms: Gramoxone, a strong agricultural concentrate in 1964, and a less concentrated granule version, Weedol for home gardeners in 1965. Animal tests had shown that concentrated paraquat was likely to be acutely toxic to humans, but just how toxic was a surprise to all involved. A clear pattern emerged from the accidental deaths. They were all related to the concentrate being mistaken for drinks after being put into a beverage bottle. 

This type of user behaviour had been expected, so from Gramoxone's introduction ICI explicitly instructed users to never repack or decant the concentrate. Nevertheless some workers took it from their employers to use at home and some retailers disobeyed the warning in response to demands from their customers. The benefits of a highly effective weedkiller were weighed against the small number of deaths in relation to how much was used. The National Farmworker's Union felt that the labelling did not adequately describe how serious the consequences of misuse were. 

As the number of poisonings by paraquat mounted, Gramoxone was reclassified to bring it under the Poisons List which meant it had to carry a label declaring it as a poison, then it was reclassified again. Being on the poisons list meant that the buyer would be aware of its potentially lethal effects, but nothing more. Those who were truly determined to illicitly buy the chemical entered false addresses in the register, or simply did not care. These people were not likely to be using it as intended, but doing the opposite of the warning "not to be taken". 

Rather than legislation, regulation or formal systems, what had the biggest effect on illicit paraquat use was the media coverage that poisonings received. Care was taken to explain that Weedol was not included in the Poisons List but some people were confused, being unaware or unclear that there were different formulations of paraquat. Journalists and presenters inconsistently discussed Weedol and Gramoxone, favouring paraquat. Gardeners were left puzzled why celebrity gardeners recommended paraquat when it was also associated with terrible deaths. Investigative journalists showed how easy it was to illicitly acquire Gramoxone. Media coverage was blamed for the large number of suicides using this chemical, and murderers even cited news articles as their inspiration for using paraquat as a poison. On the positive side, media can be credited with raising the general awareness of problems associated with inappropriate storage of household chemicals, as well as publicising how the manufacturer responded to make safer products.

In comparison, sodium chlorate was hardly ever mistaken for anything else, suggesting that its packaging, storage and appearance contributed to the comparative safety. Sold in tins of a variety of sizes, as well as 'in brown paper bags' in custom amounts to suit the user, the salt like crystals were not as attractive to people as the dark brown liquid Gramoxone decanted into drinks bottles which fooled people into trusting the contents to slake their thirst. When they did occur, fatal sodium chlorate poisonings simply did not get media coverage and correspondingly its non-poisonous reputation was maintained. 

When paraquat was under scrutiny by the PSPS, the toxic effects that the expert committee were interested in were the acute ones. Nosebleeds experienced by the workers packing the dusty granulated Weedol concerned the panel of experts, but they were satisfied that better ventilation and PPE solved them. Although environmental persistence of insecticides had already by this time led to arguments about best practice, these worries did not seem to be carried over to other new chemicals, especially paraquat which was deactivated by soil.  The long term fate of the chemical in the soil was not further examined until the 1980s by German scientists ,which resulted in a public declaration that paraquat would no longer be used in that country. 

The PSPS process has been described as flexible, with individual personal relationships playing a major part in smoothing the way. Plenty of guidance meant that companies which did put products forward for scrutiny rarely had them rejected outright. The PSPS could substantially change the presentation of a product, as demonstrated by their insistence on a granular form of paraquat for domestic users. It was true that this form was less likely to be mistaken for any edible substance although their concern had been to avoid splashing the corrosive liquid, but the extra development time and costs subsequently passed onto the gardeners meant that the cheaper liquid concentrate for professionals was appealing for some who wanted what they perceived to be better value.

ICI were at first adamant that paraquat should not be classified as a poison, claiming that it would put users in mind of strychnine and arsenic. 



---------
In addition to toxicity, sodium chlorate has been used in bangers, arson attacks and bombs. Yet it was freely available in Britain until 2009. When the EU recommended its removal from the marketplace it cited unknown, potentially toxic biological effects, rather than an antiterrorism measure. During World War Two restrictions were placed on the sale of "certain substances", including sodium chlorate, with gardeners restricted to buying only 1lb at a time. It was not suggested to manufacturers that they should incorporate a fire depressant, and the best known brand that already did have this precaution in place, Atlacide, was diverted away from domestic consumers to ensure that military and transport users had enough.
[image Atlacide on war duty advert]

