Living in a Toxic World

With my focus on acute toxicity, I was slightly out of place at this conference where the subjects principally dealt with long term, very low dose effects, but I still think that acute toxicity has a place in the discussion, as this is still a major test that chemicals have to undergo, and an issue that consumers are potentially faced with. 

I felt I was quite boring, continually asking questions about what people actually did, could they personally know  (e.g. by looking at paint or wallpaper), what action could they personally take to control their exposure to this toxic world, had researchers moved from interrogating paper sources to encountering objects in any way (which I think is important).  

The relationship between users and regulators was not very visible, with most attention paid to the relationship between manufacturers or industry and regulators. This tended to be simplisticly explained in terms of capitalism, without much exploration of the personalities behind the regulation and its manipulation or shaping.  I know this is likely a result of individuals being hard to access, but when every "Thanks for the lunch" letter is signed off, I think there is more scope for looking at committee members and their track record or involvement in other similar projects. 

While needing to comply with different countries regulations was a common theme of the conference, more could have been made of the geographic elements, for instance in terms of international companies and their business histories.

Ambivalence was a word that came up a lot, displayed by both regulators and consumers, which I was pleased about as its something that I have been trying to think about, to explain why people might say something, for instance that they are concerned about the effects of chemicals, but actually behave in quite a contradictory manner.

While actions of users might have been less visible, there was quite a lot on activism and activist groups who I would class as non-users or anti-users, but I'd have liked to know more about the practicalities of how they worked, and the personalities and allegiances of people who were part of them and how they were regarded by the people making regulatory policies and by the industries they were campaigning against. For an activist group to go round in a  van doing blood tests to find out lead levels in children' blood requires specialist skills, equipment and organisation , it's not just book research, compiling information into a newsletter and distributing it. Knowing that an activist group was set up following a property owner's experience with lead poisoning during renovation is different to one set up by a housing association or tenants; although the end aim of improved awareness about the issue and possible compensation may be the same, the motivation, leadership and structure are different. An activist group who want to prevent the use of (dangerous/unknown) pesticides being used in the fields near them, are different to the activist unit that a union becomes when it represents the interests of farmers and agricultural workers who would apply the pesticide for economic purposes and would like better information, regulation or protection to use it safely. There was time to talk about this with the people doing the research, but I still think that this could do with higher profile in conferences and in published papers. 

I felt uneasy with the often used phrase that we're living in an experiment, because we aren't. If we are, it is a very poorly run experiment, where too many variables are changed at once, where people don't know where to look for effects or how to measure them, or even if anyone will look for effects. I know that this is a long running metaphor though from highly respected scholars in this field.

The popularisation strand was not particularly strong. One of the posters reported a quantitative analysis of newspaper articles in Spain to do with mobile phone masts, Claas covered this in his presentation, as his main sources were newspapers and magazines but overall guidance could have been given to participants/ papers chosen to have develop this topic further.  Only probing researchers individually in the socialisation times revealed the opportunities through media outlets for popularisation. I hope at least one person I spoke to will now go and watch The Incredible Shrinking Man and The Incredible Shrinking Woman, which I feel quite strongly about as popular culture references to questions about the toxicity of chemicals and their unknown effects. 

Poster session - It is a good way of fitting more topics into the conference and I think it was a good experience, though I'd have preferred it to have been run slightly differently. Ideally the posters would be up, people would look at leisure during registration and coffee times, then during set times the poster owners would be there to answer questions. A 3 to 5 minute presentation is good, but there still needs to be time for people to talk individually to the poster maker. It was only during this time that people came to tell me about their experiences with paraquat, one using Gramoxone in Spain on a small rice farm (he recognised the image of the packaging), another remembered mixing up Weedol in the UK for his dad to use.

As with all conferences and indeed all research, the issue of where to draw the boundaries is a difficult one to please everyone. Someone will always wonder why such and such wasn't covered and I think the organisers of this managed to get a pretty good balance of topics, as well as create an environment where people could discuss their work constructively. It wasn't all back slappy and congratulatory, there were some spiky questions about the place of scientists and how their work was apparently being demonised and trashed by these histories written by non-scientists. Again, it is an interesting question of how an appropriately balanced, engaging story can be told with the sources at a researcher's disposal.

