Insight 1973
Housewife’s Trust
Mar/April

Post Bag p3 Lip Service on Polution 
Mrs O’R of Edinbury: 

disoappointed seem to pay no more than lip servie to the pprolems outlines b the various env gorups. Frequently mention problems of polln refuse dispoal over pakaging, but not committed to remoal or reduction. Attidutide of nuisance. It is in th e houseiwfes’ long term ainterest that movea re made to solve thse problems. 
janmes over packagina, excessive use of plasti and alu foil, detergents, and dar I say over consumption. 

repl - waste disposla equipm and water tmt plants appeat to be able to handle whatever packaging can be produce in this country. However the issues have gone much furthe rthan that now. We no have to ask ourselves v seriousy whether we are prepared to allow packaagin to incresae to such an extent that scares land and money reousices are used increasingly to build large plant to process waste that society produces. 

June 1973
food chemisty 
 re ployphophates
 White Tomkis of surrey has objected
 “we take serious issue with you on the sttaement that the amino acids used in our process are chemicals, the protein with whih we treat out chinken by our process is derived entirely from natural sources. “
 
 british nutrion foundation   - acids, be they ascorib or amino, are classivied as chemicals. Exracted from nautal source or synthetic - irrelevant. 
 
 great deal is heard about “natural” as dinstinct from “chmical” ie processed foods. In fact, all foods are made up of chemicals. 
 
 How does Man - oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, calcium etc,- cope? Nobody knows. The human body is equiped to deal twith a good many adverse circumstances. 
 
 Maybe time will show that some of these substance serve a purpose that present day tech is too clumsy to recognise. But is the fact that we cope with the danger of chem natuarlly present in food a reason for assiuming we shoul daccept chemical substances unnecesarrily introdcue by man? 
 These range throug pest, fer, fung, animal feed additives adnd food processing chems. 
 It is simple not possible even if it were detsiable to feed the popn of this country let alone the rest of the world on organically gorn food plucked straight from the garden. We need food that travels farther an lasts longer. That means preservinc and processing. 
 Hw has right to ask is the process safe/ purpose/ necessary/ nutritional value? 
 
 Ther eis no evidence SG is harmful,.... but peopel are coninced that they react to it. And what of cyclamates,? DDT? Nitrates in porcessed meat and so on? Opinons have been reivsed on all these. 
 In the meantime, the hw sometimes feel that she stands dumbly at the end of a line of food chemist, accountatns and PR experts. What do you think 
