
Daily Mail and Paraquat

Paraquat was introduced to Daily Mail readers through the farming column in 1962 as a revolutionary aid to farmers, as it would allow unploughable land (whether through access or water-logging, or wanting to avoid soil erosion) to become profitable, through planting with pasture for grazing or winter wheat.  Subsequently, a small note in the regular gardening column in December 1965, introduced the chemical to domestic gardeners. ICI was not mentioned, but the company Plant Protection was, as was the brand name Weedol and a statement that the weedkiller was based on paraquat. 

This low key introduction was followed by an advertising campaign with a very informative verbose, descriptive illustrated advert almost weekly from Saturday April 16 1966 until June 18 1966. In 1967 it was advertised weekly from Saturday 10 June until Saturday 15 July. However, the advert did not mention the active ingredient paraquat, until March 1970. The season started earlier in 1968 with ads running from April, though less frequently. 

In May 1968 the Daily Mail ran a short story which described the Essex branch of the NFU as worried that farm users were not aware that it could be fatal. This is the first mention of it being harmful to humans in the Daily Mail. ICI stated that there were warnings on the container. That same year, in September 1968 liquid paraquat, agricultural formulation generally sold under the name gramoxone, went on to the Home Office poison’s list after having caused 20 deaths in six years. Weedol, with its weaker concentration and granular formulation which had to be made up by the user, was less likely to be decanted into other containers, then mistaken for pop and drunk, was not included. This change was reported in the farming column, so could well have been missed out or skimmed over by readers without interest in agricultural weedkilling. The practice of decanting had always been forbidden by the condition of sale, and this is emphasised in some but not all of the stories of poisonings that are reported by the paper, even after it becomes a criminal offence to decant so in 1974 and that anyone found with liquid paraquat in an unlabelled bottle would be liable for prosecution. Whether anyone was ever prosecuted for this I don’t know at the moment, but this aspect was not brought up in any of the subsequent reporting about accidental poisonings, probably because it would be insensitive to do so although some coroners were quoted in the paper with statements such as “when will the public learn?”. 

Adverts for Weedol focused very much on the users' experience of weeding, by hand and with the chemical weedkiller, comparing and contrasting even in explicit terms an amount of chemical being equal to one hour of hand-weeding. In conjunction with the chemical itself, which could be used in any watering can, fitted with an ordinary fine rose or a specialised sprinkler bar, a dedicated piece of hardware was also marketed, the tudor sprayer, which was designed to be balanced, enabling accurate and economical application. I have not found any newspaper reports of incidents of pets being harmed, by drinking from unattended watering cans for example, of rashes or other skin problems from garden use. The packaging,and averts - which draw heavily on, replicating in some instances the packaging itself, perhaps to create brand recognition and to ensure harmonisation of message, stress that the paraquat in this form is too dilute to poison people with, it only affects the plants. 

Once accidental poisonings start to be reported in the paper DATE, the fact that there is no antidote to paraquat if taken is stressed again and again. As it is generally children who are the victims of mistaken decanted liquid, their inherent vulnerability causes extra concern. Reporters go into detail about how the chemical affects the lungs. Yet there are still people, such as agricultural workers who could be counted as expert users, who claim to be unaware of the effects until reading in the newspaper that it can be fatal (farmer 1975. The Daily Mail initiated it’s own investigation into how unauthorised users (amateur gardeners, would be poisoners) were getting hold of the 

Police often have to take on the job of warning people about paraquat dangers when drums are stolen, so are they especially cautious or exaggerate? There is a doctor who ponders a field being sprayed and a child playing in it then grazing their knee. The fear of unknown and unknowable doses seems to make this a situation especially deserving of caution. Tests for paraquat poisoning are not mentioned until 1974, which is also when it started being implicated in murder cases. No detail is gone into in the paper about what is necessary for this, although blood tests and failure to carry them out were mentioned in one case (hammersmith, 7 months to get round to a conference?).

Interestingly, one murder case specifically mentions reading about a woman killing her husband with paraquat (Poison stew wife is jailed for life) - seeing as the Daily Mail did go into great detail about quantities and methods, did they feel any responsibility for perpetuating or snowballing poisonings? There were several along the same lines of affairs and wanting to be free from husband or wife. Raising awareness of the effects of a product can be a double edged sword, whether it’s weedkillers or drug use. 

In light of how the lurid sexual aspects of these murder trials were reported, I personally found the placement of Weedol ads “Stop weeds going to bed with your flowers”, which appeared in the Daily Mail 3 times in 1978, inappropriate. The last murder trial reported in the Mail was actually 1975, with 1976 being paraquat free, and a suicide in 1977.  So there wasn’t actually any element about too soon - just me reading it all in one day. However, although the wording of this advertisement might demonstrate a relaxed mid 70s view of sex, it also shows a lack of awareness about how people had been using Gramoxone, still produced by ICI. Paraquat was the substance in users minds, not the brand name. 

Only in one instance did the Daily Mail confuse it’s gramoxone and paraquat