Selling Smells
Scent Home

I'm really pleased to be here with this work in progress, which is part of my PhD is called Chemicals and their users in the British home, 1930 to the 1980s.   
 
Today, I want to look more closely the smells of freshness generated by cleaning, with a quick look at advertisements from the 1940s and 50s for some different products that can help to improve the smell of domestic spaces.  I have been looking at adverts because I am interested in how the user learns about what to expect from the product and how to use it, so that's where my focus will be.  

Even when we have moved beyond the miasma theory of disease, that disease is caused by bad air, interpreting bad smells as a potential threat to health is no bad thing. When dealing with threats, microbes, too small not visible to the naked eye, an olfactory signal is very helpful, it can hint to the action of microbes. Environmental olfactory impression management is the term given to maintaining control of the smell of rooms, through air fresheners and cleaning to remove the source of the smell.  Managing smells demonstrates an awareness of the rules of decorum, and shows consideration for others as well as self respect. 

Suellen Hoye notes that in the United States, products for freshening and cleaning the air began to multiply in the 1950s. Marten and Scott in their survey of the British magazine Good housekeeping, observed this explosion of products too. That's not to say that people didn't care before the 1950s; 

[show Ozonol slide]

This Ozonol advert from 1940 promised to freshen and purify air in specifically lavatories, but the manufacturers saw an extra application, which was the Anderson Shelter. Although it says that it will make the lavatory fragrant, this advert doesn't actually indicate what kind of smell we can expect, other than promising sweet, germ free air. It doesn't tell us how that will be achieved, but it does say that its from a laboratory, an assurance of a suitably effective chemical purifier.

This advert gets straight to the problem of the smell of lavatories. MJ Daunton wrote about the developments of water closets and their migration into the Victorian home, with bad smells from either from the ineffective clearing of the bowl, or the escape of sewer gas into the house. When the toilet design that we are familiar with today came into use, in 1890, and building regulations  for newly built houses stipulated that WCs be indoors, managing the smells from a toilet became especially important. Victoria Kelley quotes Phillis Brown the author of household manuals as saying that 'water closets need constant attention... the condition of the water closet is a more certain sign of the character of a housekeeper than is any other part of the house'. 

In the 1950s, cleaning the toilet bowl was designated an every day task and even though adverts for dedicated toilet cleaners did not go so far as to attempt to shame non-users of their product, the push was certainly on for everyday cleaning, because the lavatory is used every day. The direction is for '5 second sprinkle' which is left overnight and flushed in the morning. This isn't a measurement that you can check in any other way, but is entirely dependent on the product packaging, with the sprinkle cap and the contents determining how much actually comes out. The danger with this type of measurement is that you could use too scant an amount, and the acidity generated wouldn't be enough to break down the germ-hiding limescale.  

[show Harpic advert]

This would certainly use up cleanser faster, but had another advantage too. When the packaging was opened, the active ingredient of the cleanser would quietly react away in the container. If an infrequent user felt disappointed in the cleanser then it could have been that the amount of active ingredient left was too small to cope with the amount of soil. So, using up the product protected the manufacturer, as well as ensured a satisfactory result for the user. 

Fragrance was only added to Harpic toilet cleaner in 1950. There were technical challenges associated with this, as the there were a very limited number of perfumes which would stand up to the acidity of Harpic. Reckitts, the manufacturers, had been keen to  improve the aesthetic value of this product by giving it a pleasant smell of its own for some time, shown by their trying to gauge the importance of fragrance to customers in a market survey of 1935.  In the reasons for using Harpic, the smell that resulted from its use was not an answer that was given by respondents, only that they found it a good or satisfactory cleanser, or simply from habit.

Even though a lot of behind the scenes effort went into developing a perfume blend for Harpic, this aspect is not elaborated on in their adverts. 

[show other Harpic Advert]

This 1950 advert tells users and  potential users, that a new perfumed variant "with fresh fragrance" was ready for their homes, although the un-perfumed kind was still available.  Perhaps the lack of detail about a fresh smell is because its hard to explain, or they didn't want to set up expectations by further defining the fragrance and it not being interpreted by the users in the way the company intended, and the mismatch causing disappointment. I would be interested to know how the consumers responded to this introduction, who I imagine that as far as they had been concerned, probably had already been making the space smell fresh. Harpic continued to be fragranced, so it must have been well accepted by the majority of people who liked a little extra help in the form of masking smells, or simply the novelty of the smell of this modern product. 

That extra help could be to mask odour, and also signify that the work has been done. Adding smell can act as proof of work, so not only does something look clean, it also smells clean, and anyone who has not seen the cleaning take place can't help detecting it with the always active nose. Having housework "noticed" by the other members of the household is a theme which Jessamyn Neuhaus pulls out in her examination of housework and housewives in American advertising and it is one that Zal really hammered home in their disinfectant adverts. 

Where the importance of clean smells was really hammered home was in adverts for the multi surface cleaner Zal, which used dramatic, novella-like adverts.  A Zal-experienced person, who doesn't necessarily have to be older, persuades another that they should use Zal, that in fact not using Zal is harmful to their personal relationships, not just the safety of the home.

Fairly grown up, engaged Linda is living at home but doesn't usually make product choices or do the housework, which is left to her mother. However, Linda uses Zal at work, which aligns the product with professional, paid cleaning work, not just to improve the cleanliness and safety of the domestic home. Once her mother starts using Zal, Linda's embarrassment at the "stuffiness" of the house dissipates and she can bring fiancé Noel to the family home. Stuffiness can also suggest that the existing cleaning routine and any products used were old fashioned. In using Zal, the routine is updated and modernised. 

Stuffiness could be solved by more thorough airing of the house, perhaps cracking open a window. Airing a room will get rid of odours and emanations quite fast.  However, that wouldn't sell very much Zal. 

If we think about when airing the house might not be so effective, air pollution could be a factor. Motor cars, domestic solid fuel, industrial activities and the weather combined to create choking smogs. In 1952 there was a smoke fog episode that killed thousands of people, and in 1956 there was a smog that was deemed even worse, stretching from the South Coast up to Yorkshire. Smog wasn't just an outdoor problem, it seeped into people's homes, the particulates settling on surfaces, and the gases generally contributing to poor indoor air quality. Perhaps keeping your window shut and bringing pine fresh smells in to it was the better option if there was a threat of allowing smog in. (However, these adverts were not taken from the especially bad smog years, and none of them mention eliminating smells or threats from outside the house, only the ones generated inside it.)

Another advert in the series has Jacinth's mother enlighten her about the product, perhaps again showing that the daughter was uninvolved in housework while living at home. Newly wed Jacinth had recently moved into her own home and was faced with husband Derek staying out later and later. During a tearful telephone call, her mother enlightens Jacinth to the solution. (again, a modern convenience - when did telephones become common?). She brings Zal to the house and together they cleanse the sink, drains, floors and paintwork - the adverts are careful to list all the places that the product can and should be used - and the daughter is educated by her mother into doing things that she had just not noticed while living at home. In this advert, there is no denial of the physical work has to go into making the entire house smell pine fresh, in the Harpic advert the emphasis was very much about the cleanser doing all the work. With the smelly germs banished by Zal, the relationship improved: Derek is always home early now and he praises Jacinth for keeping the house fresh and lovely. As well as making sure everyone knows about the piney smell, we are also shown images of modernity: the telephone and the furnishings. Zal is positioned as used by modern people, although it and the piney smell were not new. 

In these last couple of adverts for Zoflora, we see a woman squirting disinfectant in two different scenarios: in the toilet, and in a living room.  Where Zoflora is used in the toilet, the advert doesn't name any target smells, instead highlighting lurking infection as what the disinfectant eliminates. This is a familiar use of the disinfectants but in the other advert, although the product is still disinfectant, it's used to combat cigarette fumes. We can see the bottles and glasses out on a tray as the housewife sprays disinfectant containing that hot, modern commodity DDT to protect against moths.  There isn't an exact description of what Zoflora smells of, but the name indicates that the perfume is floral and the border further refines that to roses.  

In this dash through this selection of adverts, we have seen how smell has been used, as well as not used, to sell products. Toilet cleansers and air fresheners in toilets  delicately do not mention the smell that they get rid of. The new, clean smells can be described precisely as in the case of Zal, hinted at through the name and imagery in the case of Zoflora, or we could only have a vague idea of the smell such as Harpic or Ozonol . 

Adding a scent to the required modern chemical techniques, and using these complex, branded chemicals to scientifically speed or ease the task, conferred modernness to the user and their home. These adverts have conveyed the idea that smells are important in interpersonal relationships, such as something that you can't quite put a finger on in the case of the Zal adverts, or rectifying the aftermath of a jolly social occasion.

---------------------

 
While I was wondering how I came to be writing about smells and toilets  it dawned on me that I spent six years of my working life walking around the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester.  

The Underground Manchester gallery is a perennial favourite especially with young visitors.  This gallery displays the domestic health issue of clean water and sewerage. The centre piece is a length of mocked up sewer, complete with stuffed rats and sewer smell (actually "farmyard manure" by Dale Air). 

There's also a good selection of privies and bathrooms through the ages, a noisy tippler toilet and laundry equipment, including soaps. The subject matter gives a really great range of opportunities for the use of smells, but the convoluted, sometimes hot and stuffy basement atmosphere can get somewhat claustrophobic and could be sensorily overwhelming. What struck me was the focus on the unclean, rather than the clean smells. It could give a completely different meaning to the gallery, but the joy of smells is that they can be temporary, meaning that they can be used to tell different stories.









 
  
 
 
 
 
