
The advertising of chemicals and allied products
Alexander st-Calir Geddes
Chapman and Hall
London 1946
pp232

15
first steps in the proution of copy
What is the name of the substna/prep/article
what is the trade mark or brand name, if an?
What does it represent, or consist of?
What is it for? 
What advantage does it have over exisiting substances?
does it replace any existing substances? 
Who uses, orders, prescirbes it?
How is it used? And when? How is it packed ?
What is the cost? 
Is the firm advertising it actual mfcr or do they buy it, pack i, or process it? 

p21
chemicals - a substance used in chemisty or obtained by a chemical process. technial publicity of chemicals particularly applies to: agriculture, beverages, colouring/ flourings, cosmetics, dyes (textile) foods, food preservatives, hoticulture insecticides laundry work medicine nutition photography sanitation science veterniary wood and metal preservatives


drug has acquired a sinsiter meaning following Dangerous Drugs Acts due to loose use of the term dangerous drug by tht Press to deonte any substance which has been employed by unbalanced persons to terminate an existence which to them isno longer tolerable. The inclusion of chemical sustances in the drug museum of the pharmautical soc of GB disontinued 1912, all speciemns since that date being eiher vegtable or animal origin. 
p36
paper famine
during WW2, new set of cinditions in press advertising - system of taioning instutited in every class of newpaper. Prohibition of direct mail advertising = more clamour for newspaper space. Cost of newpaper space greatly increased in every kind of publication. 

p134
WW2 - drive to produce more food. propaganda campaigns. Artificial manures price controlled, basic cost per unit depends on % active ingedient. Farmers may obtain supplies through selling agent so fheavy chemical mfc, vast numbers whose needs are of considerable importance. several hundred chem mfcr who cater for this branch of professional and amateur food growers. Specialised advertsier can perform a real and valuable service. 

every newspaper, daily and weekly fives ome sort of info to say notherin of the articles in the specialised farming and gardenign press for teh profesional and the periodi talks on the radio, little left for the advertiser to add? Plethora of advice makdes confusion worse. 

info usually stops short of telling the whole story - mention of a trade mark or brand ina news article or on radio would suggest an interference with the freedom of the  Press or a break in the non commercial policy of the BBc. 

between the readin of an article in the popular press and the purchase of the compound of one of the usual proprietary brands there is ahiatus or a break in time which makes for indecision when the instructions come to be observed. Reader has to decide which to use, less easy to make than it seems. Informative article the advantage lies with the piblicity writer who is free to drive home to reader the association between product and its purpose. 

Inclusion of easily understood educational literature in every package and futuility of relying on the obscure and easily defaceable instructions on labels, bags or tins. ew conception of packagain for chemicals in horticulture is overdue in England - launched already with sucessin in USA

need to understand - chemicals and allied substances used, categories into whic  users can be conveniently assembled, types of propaganda/ order of the selling force, distribution points. 

p136
knowledge of soil chemisty very impt to correct application and resulting effects - elementayr but much wasted effort and mony bust be laid at the door of advertisers who choose to ignore this fundametna principle. Imperitive to maintina close contact with publication form Ministry of Agriculture - eg Soil Survey and other research institutions. 

p137
Publicity should be based on the houw to do it plan. All workers instinctively ask the elementy arquestions - how why what when and were on which informatiove educational  publicity is based. The exhortative typ eof publicity which we have seen in operatio nfor so many years has been effectie in the business of profit making. This type of publicity has been adn still is extremely costly to the consuming public. 

Insecticides 2 classes - botanical or naturally occuring substances and chemical compounds. Formerly known as Persian Inset Powder, at one time obtained from flowers of Pyrethrum roseum and P. carneum. More active specias Chrysanthemum cineraiefolium. Insect poweders in 3 grades - closed (most active), halfclosed and open. Activity is dues to compounds known as pyrethrins, activated by sesame oil, isobutylundecylenamide and librcating oils, have a marked effect on the size of the particle and the persistence of the insectidcal mist. 
Derris - activity due to rotenone with other substances. Slowely we have seen how substances of vegtable oring have had to yeild groudn to the onlsught of the syntheitc chemindustry... these have maintained their position because of the excellence of performance. Dempnds on mthods of stage, concentration in finished compound, econom in use and acury of application. 

Synthetic chem insecticides - natural / vegetable , initial cost due to added friegh, insurance charges, delays in delivery and deteroiration in transit. Danger of relying on distandt sources exemplified during war - derris and pyrethrum unbtainable. Favour synthetic and other chemical insecticides. 

p142
Disinfectands
should show
bacterial action / germicidal potency measure against the phenolic standardm determined by the Rideal- Walker test, 
Low tox tissue cells and phagocytes
Unaltered phenolic coeffient in use in prescen of pus, blood and faeces
good keeping properties
active when in soap solution or sea water
ready diffusibility, no harmful effet on textile goods or metallic containers
agreeable odour 
low cost

no idea disinfectatnt - acordingly the uses that any one disinfectant can be put should be defined clearly and degree of dilution indicated. 
Surpsing degree of ignorance as to what disinfection implies in the observance of modern hygienic practices. Many member of the public confuse the substance with its smell. In other words disinfection to them significes a terebinthinate or pine arome, or a chlorine or phenolic odour. Unfortuantely there is practally no legal control of disinfectands in England so far as effieicny is concernd, such as already exists in USA or many ohter overseas dominions. 

vocabulary is particular
	antisptics - desriction of disase germs in the body covered by Dept Agriculture, Food Drug and Cosmetic Act 1934 in USA
	disinfectants destroy germs in inanimate objects (Insecticide control act, USA)
	
	 Germicidal effiencity -  poiwer to disinfect linen, cltothes, household or hosp utensils, baths, beds, floors, walls in the precesnc eof body fluids. Toxity or irritant does not arise since skin disinfection is not under consieatin. 
	 
	  Most suitable class of dinsifectant for this purpose is one meeting reuirements above, coal tar distaillates including phonl cresols ndthe tar acids of higher boiling point ad lower solutility, the active ingreients of many black and white fluids which form emulsions on dilution. Phenol and lysol are reliable in strenght of 5 % and 2% respectively. Detergen action of soap in lysol is an advantage offset by igher cost.  


p146
The detergent action of laundry and incidentally domestic soaps is increased by the admixture with soda ash, soda crystals and in some of the cheaper qualities, sodium sulphate, the soap content varying from 5- 30 %. Sodium perborate or other oxygen evolving ingredient with phsphates, silicates  is the chief ingredient of so called self acting powders. The inudstrial interstin thse substances however lies not so much in a  knowledge of what they contain , but how they will act and how the textiles will eact. In the domestic advertising of some of these important commodieites, one isstruck by the naive exhortation on the lines of somebody’s mother not using somethign or other instead of telling a clear cut story of when to use, how and why. 
Pbuliciyt in laundry work is directed so thta the launderer can provide a public service effectively, economically and with out desructive action on the materia (fabric or colours). Resutls of reserach work at the laundry trades own research institute and elsewhere are published from time to time in the technical press and as soon as these are translated into commercial entities they should be brough before the large consuming public in the infomrative manner associated with technical propaganda. 