Searched The Times advertisements for “chemical”. The results returned showed that ICI, Imperial Chemical Industries Limited, placed adverts which show the range of products they produced.  In 1926 ICI had formed from the merger of four companies (Bruner Mond, Nobel Industries,  and established its headquarters in Millbank, London 1928. Therefore, in 1930 the company was still fairly new and needing to make an impact.ICI was the subject of a Competition Commission enquiry in 1958, due to the situation with Billington was the site of manufacture for fertilisers and Synthonia, synthetic ammonia for explosives during WW2.  The site had been selected by the Ministry of Munitions during WW1 for the production of ammonia but did not develop the site, formaly requesting that Brunner Mond undertake arrangements to work on te Haber process on an industrial scale. MB acquired the site from the Govt in 1920. The company would produce fertilisers as well as nitric acid for explosives. They made ammonia, then produced ammonium sulphate. Made granular Nitro-Chalk, 15.5% nitrogen in 1929. World wide economic depression stimulated research and ICI began reacting hydrogen with other compounds: with nitrogen, producing a range of fertilisers and industrial nitrogen products, with carbon monoxide to make methanol, with heavy hydrocarbons to make petrol. ICI forumulated compound fertilisers to contain 3 essential plant fod  - n, k and potash. ICI’s Concentrated Complete Fertiliser CC F  came onto the market in 1931, granulated for ease of handling, and to prevent separation of consitiuents. 9 varietes of CCF directed to farmers. KaynitroRuncorn  chlorine and caustic sodaWinnington and in Northwich, Cheshire -  It was here that ICI manufactured sodium carbonate (soda ash) and its various by-products such as bicarbonate of soda, and sodium sesquicarbonate. The Winnington site, built in 1873 , was also the base for the former the company Brunner, Mond & Co. Ltd. and, after the merger which created ICI, the powerful and influential Alkali Division. It was at the laboratories on this site thatpolythene was discovered by accident in 1933 during experiments into high pressure reactions.[35] Wallerscote was built in 1926, its construction delayed by the First World War, and became one of the largest factories devoted to a single product (soda ash) in the world.Experimental farm and research unit was set up in 1928 at Jealott’s Hill near Maidenhead. Of perhaps less interest to this study:Ardeer (in Stevenston, Ayrshire): ICI Nobel used the site to manufacture dynamite and other explosives and nitrocellulose-based products. For a time, the site also produced nylon and nitric acid. Blackley, Manchester – dyestuffs division Slough – paintsWelwyn Garden City - plasticsThe Times (London, England), Wednesday, Feb 05, 1930; pg. 18; Issue 45429. (120 words)  ICI at the British Industries Fair February 17to to February 28th London. In conjunction with a general display on Stand B51 there will be shown films explanatory of the manufacture and uses of products such as chemicals fertilizers dyestuffs commercial explosives, sporting ammuniction etc etc. Birmingham. On stands 9K1 and 14B, Nos 4 and 6 will be show the products of Nobel Chemical Finishs and Frederick Crane Chemical Co and Cassel Cyanide Co (Demonstration of Cyanide Casehardening)A booklet T4 entitled the Products of ICILtd will be send post free on application to the Pbulicity Dept. ICI house, London SW1The Times (London, England), Wednesday, Aug 13, 1930; pg. 6; Issue 45590. CartridgesImage of two hunters bringing down a mammoth with spear and bow and arrow.Time and Science have seen and brought remarkable changes in the methods of man as a hunter.In early times the element of uncertainty involved great danger. To-day Eley and Kynock Cartridges and scientifically accurate weapons make results dependen on little more than the skill of the shooter. Wherever shooting men gather, Eley and Kynock Cartidges claim a reputation for accuracy which has built up a large and increasing demand in every part of the world. Imperical Chemical Industries Limited. Picture of a hunter kneeling with a rifle, a shirtless black man kneeling with him.The Times (London, England), Wednesday, Apr 09, 1930; pg. 5; Issue 45483. This advert focuses on agriculture, industry in the Empire, placing ICI at the root of the success of increased productivity and knowledge. Image of three primitive people (indicated by lack of clothes?)  pulling a plough, one man pushingFERTILIZERSTime and Science have provided many remarkable changes from the primitive ways of the ancient to the organised mothods of modern farmin. In the provision of fertilizers, supported by scientific research and a free advisory service, ICI ltd are helping to produce bigger and more profitable crops in every part of the Empire. Enquiries may be made to:ICIltd ICI house London SW1Image of mechanised farming ,  man on tracterThe Times (London, England), Tuesday, Sep 01, 1931; pg. 11; Issue 45916. To correct your aim – follow the flame! Use the Eley “Rocket” Cartridge which shows the flight of the shot! IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENTThere seems to be an impression amongst sportsmen that game which has been shot with an ERC should not be eaten. Imperial Chemical Industries wishes to announce that game killed with these cartigdes is fit for te table except when it has been struck and penetrated by the actual tracer pellet. A bird hit is easily distinguisahable as the wound caused by the pellet is unmistakeable and evidentlay not caused by ordinary shot pellets. The chance of hitting a bird with the tracer pellet is the same as if the shot charge contained one pellet only. Image of cartridge. The Times (London, England), Wednesday, Oct 15, 1930; pg. 17; Issue 45644. CHEMICALSSince the beginning of time makind has endeavoured to improve upon natural raw materials. To-day science, personified in the research chemist, plays an ever increasing part in leading the way, by analsis and synthesis, to greater improvement of those products already in concstant use and to the discovery of new ones. ImpChemI research staff is at the service of all manufacturers with specil problems to be solved. Image of beareded victorians at lectureA booklet, T.12 entitled “The products of ICIL “ will be sent post free on application to the Publicity Department”This ad seems to be part of a series, placing ICI and the development of chemistry for the good of mankind “from the beginning of time”.The Times (London, England), Tuesday, Nov 01, 1932; pg. xx; Issue 46279. (816 words) Large advert outlining the variety of ICI products, as well as international offices and connections. Shows anyone who cares to read it the reach of ICI and the omnipresence of synthetic chemical products. Acids, Alkali and general chemical products – listed by chemical name, no uses or destinations stated.    (mineral) Sulphuric acid, hydrochloric, nitric,  (organic) acetic formic. Soda ash, bicarbonate o fsoda, caustic soda, soda crystals, salt cake, silicate of soda, calcium chloride, sodium sulphide, salt, etc. Carbon dioxide – brand name? “Drikold”for the preservation of icecream etc and for carbonating beer etc. Would assume this is for industry?   http://picturestocktonarchive.wordpress.com/2004/08/10/ici-in-billingham-14/ “Pioneer” brand cement  http://www.britainfromabove.org.uk/image/epw032215?quicktabs_image=0   Billingham againChlorine products – listed by chemical name, no destination or use. Bleaching powder, liquid chlorine, sodum hypochlorite etc. Domestic chemical produts – simply listed as cleansing preparations and laundry materials, no brandnames given. Dyestuff intermeiates and accessory producat for use n dyeing and allied trades. Dyestuff for all purposes…Explosives. Industiral uses. Fertilisers sulphate of ammonia, nitro-chalk, British nitrate of soda, ammonium , phosphate, concentrated fertilizers and ordinary copunds. Special concentrated and granular fertilizers for lawns and gardens.Leather cloths – upholstery of all sorts! Lighting – Gas mantles burners and fittings, electric fittings, peterol vapour lamps and fitttings gas and electric heatin gapplianece. Lightening fastener – Patent device for use in place of buttons hooks etc. Limestone and lime products. Quic lime and hydrated lime. MAteirals for plastic moulding industry, listed by names and useMetalsMotor cycles and accessoriesNitrogen products – nitric acid, ammonia and ammonium salts, nitrates, nitrites, etc (Seems somewhat superfluous, but allows more of the alphabet to be highlighted)Paints, enamels and varnishes – of all kinds, industial and decorative. Rubber chemicals – industrial Sporting ammunitition – separated out from the explosives. The Times (London, England), Monday, Mar 12, 1934; pg. 20; Issue 46700. Small ad?ICI logoFerilizers Limes and Pest Control ProductsThe Agricultural Service of ICI and its representative throught the country are always at your service. ICI millbank London SW1The Times (London, England), Thursday, Oct 11, 1934; pg. 31; Issue 46882. Image of car (no people) All Vauxhall cars are finished with BelcoThe Better car finishMaintina the beautiful appearance of your car with Belco No. & and Belco Polishing Wax.  These materials may be ordered from any garage or dealer. Write us for our leaflet “Valeting your car”Nobel Chemical Finishes (Associated with ICI) The Times (London, England), Saturday, Apr 16, 1932; pg. 15; Issue 46109. They go twice as far!ICI Garden FertilizerICI GF contains all the plant foods necessary for leaf root and flower. IT is the first fertizer to combine the advatnages of granulation with concentration. Clean and easy to sow. Goes twice as far as other fertilizers. Ask your dealer for a bag to-day and mae your garden a show garden!ICI Lawn fertilizerICI LF combines two operations in one – nourishment of grass and destuction of weeks. Treatment though a single season will effect a wonderful improvement. Concentrated for economical use. Granular for easy sowing. Begin to make a stron and good-looking lawn to-day with ICI LF. These fertilizers are the results of many years of experimental work by the research staff of ICI. Packe in bags 2.5 lb, 1/6, 7 lb 3/6, 14 lb 6/, 28 lb 10/6 and 56 lb 18/,  (are these affordable?Illustateion of sacks. Full instructio in every bag.  ICI Millbank, SW1