Paraquat – ici  
p.10 production of soda ash – Solvay process vs Leblanc process. Solvay produces better soda ash, but Leblanc has useful byproduct of chlorine, used in bleaching esp textiles. Leblanc companies amalgamated to become the United Alkali Company in 1891 but was quickly weakened when they did not react to the advancements in technology and process that meant others could produce chlorine.
p.15  nitrogen market collapsed in the 1930s making Billingham a millstone 
1924 – Lever Bros find out that Brunner Mond have been selling cheaper alkali to CWS, despite promising Lever Bros it would  not. Settled out of court in 1925. 
p.113 very few products made by ICI go directly to the consumer in the high st – Weedol garden herbicide and Dulux paint are a couple of examples.
p.110 new materials were stiffer and less flexible and could not be used for exaple for cable insulation or the new squeezy bottles for washing up liquid which were developed in the early and mid 1950s from the older versions of polythene. But they soon found an important market in the mfcr of rigd bottles for milk, bleach and other liquids…
MDI foam made by ICI enabled refrigeration to progress – refrigerators could become more sleekly designed as well as cheaper, frozen foods began to take off as more people were able to afford fridge freezers. 
Synthetic fibres and synthetic dyes – fashion and colour after the rationing and drab colours of the WW2
p.100-1 detergents were first marketed for the housewife under brand names in 1951 – they had been developed during the war as substitutes for saop and the result was a wash day revolution as coppers, washboards and metal buckets boiling on the stove in steamfilled kitchens becamse a thing of the past for many people. Reflecting in 1986 on the greatest changes in his lifetime, ICI’s top research scientist Prof Derek Birchall singled out the disappearance of wash-day which might in fact stretch to four days if weather prevented outdoor drying on the line. 
