

The History of Reckitt and Sons Limited
Basil N Reckitt
A Brown and Sons Limited, London and Hull 1951


Benefit of business - 
p91
the consumer - broadly the housewife all over he world. SHe benefited by having easily available good claeniand nd washing materials as could be made at a price within her reach - a service to the world in a minor key perhasp but never the less a very real one. In the provision of Dettol a more spectacular service was rendered adn it may be that a very large number of mother have been saved suffering and owe their very lives to it. 

employee - section of tpeople in an y countyr who are contende dna interest in their work is an asset to that country. (built garden village, baths, laundry, war memorial, education,music society (wanted brass band) mens clubs, sports clubs, almshouses) 

p55
Brasso Liquid Metal polish 1905
	in Australia liquid metal polish had outsold paste, try it in UK
	1908 bought Bluebell, 1909 bought Shinio (Liverpool), 1910 acquired Mepo (Newcastle)

Silvo 1912

but no monopoly as liquid metal polish of a type being comparatively easy for the small man to make. (What was in this?)

reputation of Brasso damaged when [methylated?] spirit was not available and some batches were made up with water - had to withdraw product while supplies were interrupted.

p54 
after Geneva Convetion the use of “Red Cross” had to stop, so Red Cross Blue became Red Crest Blue and apparently no-one whether customer or user ever alluded to the change. 

p71
1919 four main manufactures were Starch, Blue, Grate Polish and MEtal polish. 
but more home washign was unlikely in view of the increased efficeincey of the laundries and introduction of the bag wash; grates of the new type were tiled or finished in enamel, brass fitting were being replace by oxydised metal of various kinds which did not need polishing.  New products had to be found. 

p72
What did the public want? 1919 - Directors were instructed to meet specially to consider research. 8yrs later, Resarch committees et up - younger members of staff, continued to meet ever since. 

1921 Zebo - liquid gate plish. 
1922 decied to market a window cleaner - Windo was a failure locally but improved product tested elsewhere, and Irish particularly liked Windolene so this was marketed nationally.
1923 Bath Salts - costs taken out, not  possible to mark a t competitive price
1926 - effervescing bath tablets, turned down as not sufficeitnly novel. However idea kept alive - perfumed cubes with water sofening properties called Reckitt’s Bath Cubes were approved. selling tests made in 1927 and product was born. Had to register Betty as a trade name for Bath Cubes a the advertising slogan “Betty, where are the Reckitt’s Bath Cubes?” became so well known. 

1926 desirable for the Company to market a fresh article and in this connection to look into and report a moth preparation, a baking powder, an aluminim pain under a proprietary name and an oil-polish finish for motor cars. Nothing came of the first three. Developed Karpol which could be applied on top of mud and dust, great interest aroused but it failed when it turned out that motorist did not clean their cars nearly as often as had been thought. 

1924 purchase of Harpic lavatory cleaner business had been turned down (too pricey)
1931 Research Committee raised the matter again, Lab produced a proparation of their own, negotiated with Harpic Co. acquired in 1932.
	Harpic also owned Sanpic, drain cleaner, sales were dropped by t name used for a household disinfectant. Flypic insecticide sold for a few years but not a sucess. 
	
1927 Brassware Scheme - housewife had fewer fitting on which to use metal polish, the Company sold her ornamental brassware specially made in Birmingham. Sold through grocery shops - ususally sold through ironmonger and hardware merchant so were miffed but eventually sold more. Sceme encouraged purchase of unlacquered brass which looks so much better and incidentally requires polishing. Many shell cases, souvenir of WW1 saw the light of day as fashion for brass was established. 

1933 Dettol

Raw materials - Suffolk Chemical Company purchased in 1928 to ensure supply of spirt used in liquid polish

p83
entry into Pharmceutical trade 1929 - working on solid disinfectand adn a liquid antisepti c that would not harm the skin. Leading products were Lysol (poison, corrosive to skin at germ-effective concnetrations) for personal use and carbolic preparations for general household disinfection. 

Dr Reynolds, a bacteriologist with the Jeyes Company approached Reckitt’s with an idea that chimed with their own plans for a product that would not harm tussues and have a pleasant smell that would would improve its aesthetic vvalue. Worked on not own solution, but the use of ParaChlor Meta Xylenol as main germ killer. by 1930 disinfectant with Rideal-Walker co0efficient of 3 (??) and required qualitys had been prepared, ready to be marketed under name of Disfectol. Should it be household disinfectant (bigger sales) or

p84 
a personal antiseptic, which its special qualities were particularly suited. Decided to be personal (October) Nov introducted a household disinfectant subject to medial assurances that it was not harmful if used for personal purposes.  Turning point - established special value for personal use and waste of special wualities that would be involved if it were sold for pouring down draind and sinks. 

Introduced through doctors first - 1932 July test towns, 6 medical representatives caled on doctors and hospitals, samples and letters sent to all drs in country. 
Initially sent out under Suffolk Chemical Co as thought that the non-medical nature of other Reckitt’s products would disadvantage it, but the name of a known and trusted company was needed. 
p85
Tests arranged through Leondard Colebrook at the Bernhard Baron Research Lab Queen Charlotte’s Maternity Hospitatl - correlation between intorduction of Dettol and decline in national figures for maternal mortality (but clouded by concurrent introduction fo improved techniques inc masks and sulphonamides and penicillin)

1933 published joural article comparing Dettol, iodine and others  to prevent puerperal spsis- Dettol turned out best, convinced Doctors to use it. “Dettol is the propriatary name given to a halgen derivative of xylenol, the germicidal properties of which have been studied by Dr WC Reynolds, Rsearch Chemist to Messrs Reckitt of Hull by which firm it has recently been put on the market. The xylenold derivative is not itself solutble in water but is dissolve in Dettol, in a mixutre of aromatic essential oils and this solution is miscible in water in a permanently stable emulsion. It has a pleasant smell. Unlike most of the antiseptic substances in common use its employment in concntrated form on the skin or mucous membranes is not prohibitied by toxic effiects. .... in contrast to v low toxicity for skin and mucous membrane its effect on the bacteria with whch we are concerned in puerperal fever is high”.

Dettol was well adn truly launched. Growing pains - misused and innumerable ailments which had noting to do with it were blamed on its use. Went ahead to ceome the company’s biggest single line. Impt section of sales contintued to be in hospitals. 

CW Hobson responsible fo rthe Tell me Doctor press advertising slogan, also bottle and label design. 

p86
Dettol was confined to the Chemist. 

1937 Steradent denture cleaner wa bought. 
Pine disinfectant under name Sanpic was falsely fathered under Suff Chem Co provided for sale through the grocer as household disinfectant. Main sale 2d bottles, based on demand fot eh 3d size of Brasso [totally different product/ amt needed surely?] but withdrawn as yeilded no profit. 

p41
ultramarine for laundry blue had been obtained from lapis lzuli, v expensive, supplied from the continent. Early in 19th century manufacture of soda ona large scale was in in fancy, workmen noticed the prescence of a blue colour in cerain parts of the process. 1814 Tassaert say formation, prize offered on a manufacturing scale, led to efforts of Jean Baptiste Guimet who est factory in Lyons 1828. Later German facotries stared, but supply unsatisfactory to Reckitt 7 Sons. 1882 Reckitt and Sons acuired land and build small factory in 1883 various Germans engaged to provide technical advic eon ultramarine manufacture - practically al used in Lundry Blue. [soda not mentioned, assume no longer part of the process?]
