Fifty Years of Unilever 193 − 1980
WJ Reader 
Heinemann, London 1980

Persil only used by Unilever in the UK and France elsewhere in Europe it belongs to Henkel. Persil Washes Whiter ad campaign started in 1930

		watch get them clean - rather than hard work
		whitens gently as rubbing never would
		watch persil do it better quicker than you can yourself
		the amazing oxygen washer
 
p19-20
No side of Unileer’s business that did not stand to suffer from economic crisis of 1929. A crisis of primary production - affected margarineby throwing cheap butter on the market, oil milling by the recution of demand for animal feeds and raw materials by disasterous and unrpedicatble falls in the prices of oils and fats. As a crisis of industry it affected the market for nearly all the goods except animal feeds because they were intended for working class households whose livelihood might disappear.  

p74 Unilever had been in packaaging and printing since the early days. Large interest in Thames Board Mills. Rise of modern chemical industry esince 1945 has widened the range of packaging materials. Devts in older materials such as glass, metal foil and paper, plastic film of various kinds and rigid plastic containers have come into use either on their own or in acombination with paper, board, metal and glass. Thames board Mills were taken over completely in 1964. 


p81
in the 1960s and 70s Unilever was investing in chemicals - fatty acids, glycerine, vitamins, perfumery and adhesives. Techically their chemical interests are related to their traditional activites, but in marketing they differe widely. They’re aimed at industrial customers so they depend on technical service. 

p102 advert explains what oxygen does 
	Persil is full of oxygen which is set free in the washing. The Persil oxygen eats up the dirt, leaving the clothes clean and unharmed.  (1920s)
	Ordinary washing only gets dirt off the fabric, PErsil’s soap plus oxygen action gets dirt right out of the fabric.  (1930s)
	
p122 Unilever is answerable to public authorities in every country where it operates. Govt everyweherare atking more and more power to regulate business activities ‘in the public interets’. This power manifests itself in the control of prices, of profits, of foreign exhcange, of imports and exports, in the protection of employment, in wage bargaining, in relations with trade unions. Applied in the interest, real or supposed, of the consumer and with gleeful censoriousness to advertiseing. IT guides businesses to regions where they would not otherwise establish themselves, and somtimes away form regions where they would. It forces the disclosure of information once, no doubt mistakenly, considered private. It is brough to define and forbid pollution and to take care of what is grandly and unspecfiically termed “the envrinment”.Companies are no less anxious than govts to make sure - in their own interst - that no harm comes to consumers from their products. Chairmen of Limited and NV oberved of anti-pollition meausres in 1973 “There is a limit to what a company can afford.’
	

