The History of Unilever
Charles Wilson
Cassell & Company 1970 London
p341

Henkel had feeling that there was no progres and that the saturation point had been reached in 1933

In Britain: stationary consumption of soap products between 1924 and 1930 

But sales of soap by all mfcrs in Britain rose in the 1930s
434000 tons in 1929
551000 tons in 1939
average Englishman consumed more soap but as prices fell, didn’t have to pay as much. 

p342

Several facors behind increased soap consumption 
	cost of living going down, wages going up
	soap raw materials cheap = highly competitive conditions
		combined to producte more demand for soap - widespread unemployment did dent sales. soap had become a necessity. 
		
p343

In UK LEver’ share of the market had fallen over the twenties to just of 50% soap production in the mid 1930s
Imported soaps, toilet soaps from Canada and US , and dumped soap from Russia. 
CWS was the biggest home competitor of the 1920s and increased sales since 1925. 
p344
Proctor and Gamble in 1930 purchased established Newcastle saop busienss Thomas Hedley and Sons, added another modern factory in Manchester, and built another at Purfleet in 1938. 

Pound collapsed in autumn 1931, summer 1932 all Unilever soaps reduced in price. Linked to a campaign to rationlise manufacture and selling  weed out less profitable lines concentrate on those which paid best. 

Taste of housewives in soap was capricious. Family and praish loyalties remained a potent factor in the comple of soap firms. Port Sunlight was the only one to have a national market for its proprietary proucts. Crosfields, Watsons Gossage’s and John Knight’s had strong regional markets and some grip on the national market for cettain products. **TH Harris served a market which was nationwide but largely in unbranded products.** Christr. Thomas was estalished int he West most firmly, spasmodically elsewhere. Other firms all served local markets. 
		
p345		
Home Soap Executive - CW Barnish, LH Hartland Swann, Geoffrey Heyworth - UK body established in 1929. Collected data to reduce and disperse by rational analsis the mysetery that surrounded the soap salesman. Analysis and proposals were presented by Geoffrey Heyworth to a conference of managers in 1931. 

In Unilever in UK there were 49 manufacturing companies, maintaining 48 separate sales organisations. Vast majority handed househould soap, each firm sell products in competition with other members of the Unilever family.  This must be simplifed and cocentrated. 

p346
seven principlal fields of use for saop - served by household soap, cabolic soap, soap powders, soap flakes, scourers, dish washers, toilet soaps and miscelaneous. The aim should  be to see that each manufacturing firm which was worth retaining should supply whatever proproetion of these eight types f product might be appropriate to its particular kind of market and it should give reasonable but not excessive or uneconomic choice to the consumer between one brand and another of any particular type. The max number of brands of hard soat to be supplied in the British market by any single company shoul be three. Polucy would concentrate on a reduced number of brands, each meeting a different and distinct requirement of the housewife, on reducted costs and more effective advertiseing. 

p347 
in 1932 in the West of England, travelling taff cut from 220 to 154 and number of packs from 852 to 294, without any loss to total sales in the area. 

Gossages at Widnes - most production was for export, so closing this meant less risk to goodwill than might have occurred if the plant produced for local use. Production went to Port Sunlight, which chemical production transferred to Crosfields at Wattington. There was opposition from local interests, but they eventually say the force of the argument - savings estimated at £100 000yr. London 3 factories were shut and production moved to John Knights at Silvertown, Harris’s at Stratford, or Cook’s at Bow. Factories at New Pin (Hull), JL Thomas (Exeter) and Mill Bay (Plymouth) were closed in 1935. Closing of Hudson’s works at Bank Hall and West Bromwich.

p349 
In the 1880s Lever ha dpersuaed the housewife that his ‘pure’ vegetable oil soap was better andd easier to use than old tallow bar soap. By the 1930s tallow bar soap had virtually ceased to exist in the British market. The type of soap that had originally replaced it now was feeling the competition of new kinds of soap, powders and flaes. Prgress of these products in N America had become marked in the 1920s and in the 1930s they were everywhere in Europe, elbowing hard soap out of favour. 

p350
Powder had originally been a cheap prouct of low detergent qulities designed for dishwahding. Powders with high detergent qulitites were developed from this, either with or without bleaching components. Advantage was that it could be put into solution immediately and amount of scrubbing requried was reduced. Powders were for personal or household linene, flakes were suitable for washing delicate fabrics. Increased slaes reflected womens dress, silks, fine wools. Soft soap, scouring agents and shaving soap did not change. 
			hard		powder	flake		toilet
1929		61%		21%		6%		3%
1939		44%		29%		12%		6%
		
		
p351
In France Unilever had manufacturing rights to Persil, which sold well. Where Persil was a Henkel product, the 1930s saw the development of perborate powders usually under the trademark Radion to challenge Henkel’s dominance of the powder market. 

growth of trade in cosmetics, shampoos, perfumes, shaving soaps, toothpastes, dyes, toilet prepartions and water softening agents many of them linked to soap through a common deoninator of oils and fats. 

p352
Closely linked with growth of soap poweders was the appearance in the mid 30s of soapless detergent powders designed for all kinds of washing purposes. Early 30s came to an agreement where IG Farben was to supply Unilever with basic materials for soapless powder. Spur in US were he large rgan communities in areas of ard water, soapless powder esp well suited to his. 

In Germany the devt of synthetic detergents was a by-product of the shortage of natural fats - supplies of scarce foreign currency were spent on other things. 

Elsewher ein Europe, little reason to explore expensive synthetics when there were pletnitful natural fats. 

Joseph Watsons of Leeds had soapless shampoo by 1935 and an experimental power for washing fine fabrices by 1936. 

1936 factory in Ruhr supplying Henkel’s Dusseldorf factory with fatty acides made from coal. 

Crosfields were undisputed leader in important forms of sci research and technology.  (p381)