Classon
Aroma

p83
what were the reasons for the olfactory divide of the sexes? Until end of 18C perfumes used extensively by men and women, the same ones,, then use declined. Many men left wearing scents altogether, however, wmon changed to lighter floral fragrances. 

by late C19 0 certain scents - sweet floral blends exclusively feminine while other sharper scents were characterised as masculine. 
typing of perfumes as frivolous = suitable for frivolous creatures only = women in 19C

according to gender standards of the time
p84 as sweetness and floweriness were quintessentially feminine characteristic. Flower garden = feminine, the woods were typed as male making woody scents sch as pine and cedar an acceptable alternative for men. 

Whole sense of small had become feminised and devalued as a means of conveying or acquiring essential truths. 

Smells not thought to have therapeutic powers. 
smell = sentimentality, nostalgia and intuition = women

WWI upheaval - smell ridicouly in fast paced and hard nosed modern world. Pot purrs had no place in the functional twentieth century home. 
deodorisation of public and private space, restriction of perfumes to personal use, on special occasions only and primarilyy by women. 

[89
Pasteurs' discovery that most familiar diseases caused by germs led scientists to conlcude that foul odours were not the agents of illness but merely unimportant byproducts. Medical community left smells behind and moved to microbes. 

p194
code of smell does exist in Western contemporary culture. 
lemon scent added to Joy washing up liquid told consumers that the detergent cut though grease. If one wanted to convey rather that a detergent was gentle on the hands a soft scent would be suitable. Jellinek notes that adding a mild fragrance to detergent advertised as strong would serve to reassure users that it wouldd not harm their skin. 
Certain fragrances convey several connotations, not all suitable for a given product. Consumer test of pine fragrance evaluated as fresh nd clean , but when added to facial tissues the tissues were considered harsh and rough. Also carries association of rough and hard - undesirable for tissues. 
Candy scents rated pleasing and fresh do not do well when added to toothpaste as they also carry the meaning 'bad for teeth'. 

p195
meanings change
Jellinek 1975 - 10 yrs ago herbal scent in shampoo might have communicated for peole who believe in strange folk medicines, today it means modern and living in harmony with nature

