

smell = care but Conflict with squirting smell to mask/cover - air fresheners?

Not only could products make your home smell fresh, they would improve your relationships.


independent standards - keeping up with the Jones' no longer applicable (Friedan p173)
professionalisation = smell = choosing the right tools for the job (Friedan, p173-4)

in Married to the Mop Jessamyn Neuhaus notes that Suellen Hoy found that products that claimed to clean the air in the home began to multiply in the 1950s

"Growing sensitivity to smells also prompted homemakers to enlist themselves in a "clean fight" against "indoor odours" - household foes that seemed nearly as disturbing and pervasive as germs. Magazine advertisements and television commercials illustrated how unpleasant aromas presented "so many chances to offend". Cooking, bathroom, perspiration, smoking and refrigerator doors were only a few of many that might embarrass or disgust family and friends. Thus "smart" housewives bought an excess of "freshening" products tackled all those jobs nobody liked, and killed unwanted odours." (p202)

Almost every type of housework related product had at one time or another highlighted the elimination of offensive household odours. 

"nothing like the smell of sunshine on clean laundry"
"smelling like a breath of fresh air"

p204
Lysol and other all purpose cleaners and disinfectants made up majority of air freshening products. Though in the late 70s and rapidly growing, the number and variety of air fresheners expanded to today's vast assortment. 

p205

Incensed: Food smells and ethnic tension
Benjamin Aldes Wurgaft
Gastronomica: The Journal of Food and Culture, Vol. 6, No. 2 (Spring 2006), pp. 57-60
p57 history of racisim is full of complaints about the way that a particular group's cooking smells. Xenophobia fuelled by smell-based slurs. 
p59 Jay Geller p211 "The aromatics of jewish difference" in Jews and Other differences: the new jewish cultural studies "Pleasant smells do not exist as part of the urban landscape"
p60 - unlike vision, but like taste, smell is a physical penetration into the body
Smell is more like hearing it its passivity, its nature as a channel of vulnerability, a mechanism by which we both know our environment and know that we are at its mercy. 

