Daily Mail
Insecticide

Spray Peril 
letters 
02/10/63   p12
surely if an insectidde is as dangerous to humans as it is to animals (sept 27) it is equally dangerous to use on crops. the use of insecticides seems to have got out of hand. IT is time for a through investigation. 
Mrs DE Bowerman 
Enfield. 

04/04/78
Poison Alert
Kepon is a poison
US are disposing of stocks in UK - no legal requirement that competes the firm concerned (licensed by th eMinistry) to notify authorities that it wishes to import this particular chemical. 
health and sanity, priority and purpose? compares to perfume through customs and potting sheds. globally unwanted poison can still trundle into britain by the lorry load as a matter of routine. 


Insectidice and paraquat only appear together on the page in ICI adverts  - e.g. March ing ht Garden
where they list variou snobs that require ICI products


herbicide and insecticide only appear on the page together in advertisements
e.g. 
Shell - to bee or not to bee
about how they test insecticides, field trials. Research centre in Kent carefully studies the environmental effect of every new Shell agrochemical. Bei it an insecticide, fungice or herbicide. WE publish the results in scientific journals for everyone inc competitors to examine. 
If we hadn't taken him [honey bee] under our wing, who would have?

Insectidice and poisoning

When there is death in the nappie
23 07/54
oiled skin, naphthalene - nappies stored w moth balls. 
accidental contamination of nappy left in room spared with a phosphate insecticide. 
most dangerous poison is one that is deliberately applied - boric acid in nappy rash. 

Poison truck flour makes 49 people ill
all poisoned by insecticide. 
flour carried in a railway wagon used for consignment of new insecticide called Endrin - leaked onto floor. Reported in BMJ

Label Error Caused powder poisoning
26 Jan 1956 p 3
Marlborough stomach powder mystery. Sodum fluoride, a powerful insecticide, found its way into the dispensary of Timothy K Maurice Vera Crewe a dispensary who tasted it to prove its safe died soon after. 2 men patients became dangerousy ill and a third had not taken any. Coleage who innocently issued the poison powder. 
hopeful that all the poison had been decovered. came from bristol firm, ready mixed. 
identical bottle labelled sodium fluoride traced 0 did not contain sodium fluoride. 



When I took her hand, I knew...
13 Dec 1961 p 8
Marie Bearnard
In britain she would never even have been charged
arsenic insecticide - found in any farm in france. 
battle of medical experts. muddled remains by toxicologists. Earth impregnated with poison. 
local wine reputed to contain more arsenic than any other white wine in france - habitual drinkers acquire tolerance

Three ill from spray
31 July 1963, para on p1. 
suspected poisoning from crop spraying - Norfolk, St Faith and Aylsham. blown over from fields. 

13 Sick now proison probe starts
01.08.63 p9
10 cases Sussex, 3 in Norfolk. NFU - farmers naturally do what they can to make sure all the sprays they use are sae but we shall ask for a full report on this case as soon as the investigation are complete. 
(absolutely no mention of the type, family or name of the chemical) 

Firm switches chemical blamed for killing cows - 

fluoroacetimide. killed 100 cats and dogs in a Welsh town a dn a herd of cows in Kent. 
Rentokil, Smarden.
Up to now there has been no definite proof that these animals have died from fluoroacetamide poisoning. Now there is a report from Mag scientists that all the circumstantial evidence suggests that they did. 
Manufacture sometiere see, only mcc in Europe. 
Mag approves the chemical's use under its regulations .

Dogs licks can poison, town told
poison that killed a hundred dogs and cats last weekend could be dangerous to children. The poison , an insecticide that can be brought oe rthe counter could be absorbed through the skin by people licked by a dog or cat that had eaten it. 
Horse had eaten the poison which could have come from grass or garden refuse sprayed w insecticide. Fluoracetamide used to protect crops and plants and can be used as a rat killer. Chances of poison absorbed by people through table meat are negligee. 

Herd death mystery
08.02.1964
2 paras, p1
fluoroacetamide poisoning mile form Smarden where cattle died last april when insecticide leaked form factory into the soil 
vet urges ban - page 3

Vet urges immediate ban on killer chemical
08.02.1964 p3
Mr Doughlas Good of Tenterden Kent - no evidence to show that humans can be poisoned by the chemical in present wy of use. What about in water supplies. No known chemical test that will trace it below a certain level. 

Kennet hMelanby - Royal institution
commons - MOPs questions about investigation by MAg. 
Smareden 0 Rentokil dump contaminated soil in sea approved by Min Transport
Ireland - firm stopped sales of Tritox, contains fluoroacetemide and promised a refund on all returned supplies. Sales in Briatin have been stopped. 

Now we know the birds are dying ... What next? 
30 Dec 1964, p5
article about DDT
mentions NAture conservancy
Ag Chemicals approval scheme
protective clothing when spraying 
Dieldrin sheep dip on bare hands -
hazards to health by abuse of pesticides. used by people who do not realise the danger. 
dieldrin can be used for sheep dipping in 1965 but not after. Aldrin barred for most uses form ext fir day. 
automatic vaporising dispenser so thousands of food shops. 


Scientists clash over poisoning 
02.07.66 p7
Govt scientist Dr Dan Davies (Porton Down) warned against a type of insecticide which would casuse explosive outbreaks of poisoning if used widely. 
organophosphorous compounds includes some which are sold to amateur gardeners. 
considerable care must be taken in handling these substances. widespread use will lead to accessional accidental feather. 

careless handling and greed, explosive outbreaks of poisoning can occur with all the impact of a n epidemic and if the route of poisoning is oral can provide the medical profession with all the indications and associated problems of an infective disease process. 

Min Ag expert commented - 14 years no death caused by the use of these insecticides
system we adopted - notifiers govt and does not proceed w sales until full approval. 
In US where crops are sprayed by air a regular number of people are killed by pesticide next year. Next to no air spraying here. some of these compounds are so non toxic that they are sold for the amateur gardener. 

V strict rules about people who work with it. 

1960 scrap yard worker Dennis Keeble of I[swich died of exposure to an organophosphorous compound after piling up empty tins of insecticides. 


Hunt for 20 killer suites
South Africa - chemical test of the couch revealed material impregnated w deadly concentrated insecticide. Poison spilled on 70 bales of upholstery material during shipment. 
120 affected suites have been found in shops and homes in South africa. Another 20 yet to be traced .

