Chemist and druggist Diary
1952
Carbonis tetrachloridum
cost: 30d / lb
dispensed in 4oz   1s 9d
1oz  6d
1dr   1d

Albright & Wilson Ltd
Astra Chemicals Ltd
Berk FW & Co Ltd
Chemical Manufacturing Laboratry LTd
Greef RW & Co Ltd
Imperial Chemical (Pharmaceuticals)  Ltd. BP (Veterninary)
Johnsons of Hendon
Revai & Co Ltd
Carbon tetrachloride capsules
Ferber, Robert Ltd
The John & son Ltd. 

Sodium chlorate
does not seem to be on the list. 

Soda caustic (sticks) pu. PII (15)
cost
78d per lb
16oz    9s 9d
4oz      2s 9d
1oz     9d
1dr		2d

Cuastic Soda Pellets [Tins]
Berk FW & Co Ltd
Courtin & Warner Ltd
Johnsons of Hendon Ltd

Caustic soda pure sticks
Berk FW & Co
Courtin & Warner Ltd
Howards & Sons Ltd
Johnsons of Hendon Ltd
Morson Thos & Son Ltd
Tyrer T & Co Ltd (and pellets)

Sodii bicarb. gran 
cost 5d/lb
16oz   8d
4oz    3d
1oz    1d

sodii barcab pulv
cost 4.5d/lb
16oz   6d
4oz     2d
1oz     1d

acid . oxalic. coml PI (8)
cost: 38d/ lb
dispensing price: 16oz   4s 9d
4oz   1s 4d
1oz   5d
Makers:
Biddle Sawyer & Co Ltd
Greeff RF & Co Ltd
Guest Industrials & Co Ltd
Revai & Co Ltd


Ammonia, Liquid
Berk FW & CO Ltd
**British Disinfectant Co. Ltd (Household 'Sprim')**
Chemical Manufacturing Laboratory Co.
Clarkson Wade Ltd
**Ferris & Co Ltd (Household)
Thornton & Ross Ltd (Household, Clear or Cloudy)**
		Scrubbs does not get a mention

sodium chlorate is listed
Berk Fw & Co Ltd
Chemical Manufacturing Laboratory Co
Munro Vitarex Ltd
Pearce LRB Ltd


Dabitoff and Thawpit are not mentioned - maybe carbon tetrachloride is falling out of favour?
carbolic powder only made by one?
lysol made by many

Sanpic disinfectant gets a listing - Reckitt & Colman


Poisins Regualtaion p 401
PI - Part I piston with retail sale restricted to authorised sellers of poisons on registered premises

pII - Part II poison, with retail sale limited to authorised sellers or listed sellers on registered premises

SI - First Schedule poisons with sale subject to entry i poisons register
DD - Dangerous drug
R only - Fourth schedule poison, supply lawful on prescription only 
S2 Second Schedule poison with supply in bulk subject to relaxed labelling provisions. 

Ammonia (PII, S2): Strengths below 5% w/w of NH3 Ammonium salts not being solutions of ammonia. Substances with less than 5% w.w of NH3, refrigerators, smelling bottles

Oxalic acid (P1, S2) exempt form act and rules in laundry blue and polishes. 

April 19 1952, 529
Branch and association meet ins
horticultural flms - member sod the exeter branch of the pharmaceutical society met at Barmstaple recently to see two films Pests and Disesase of the Garden, and Soisl. Mr WN Boorne presided (chairman) and MR DF Wilson (Plant Protection Ltd) gave an address and a discussion followed. 

April 12 1952,497
Topical Reflections
Toxic Chemicals in Trade
p477-78 - Agricultuarl Poisonous Substances Bill - carefully study it. A Forthcoming conference on safety in chemical worlds is announced. Topics to be presented shows that so far as mcc is concerned the provision of measure for ensuring safety i handling poisonous substances is being examined thoroughly. ... some months ago I pointed out that in eveitable risks arise in handling new or nearly new chems of uncertain toxicity. The use of such chems has extended to sevarl trade processes (inc mangemtn of crops) and it is  highly impt that s large  margin of satye as poss shoos be provided for every one useinghtse chmes. No sooner does one type of weedkiller get into general use than another type geld to be superior receive publicity. No one is to be blamed for the state of affairs but there seems to be no end in sight. A point to be borne in mind, therefore is that chem products can be marketed before their toxicity has been fully tested for degree, duration and after effects. 

April 5 1952 p477
purpose of the Ag (Poisonous Subs) Bill is to provide for the protection of operators against the risks of poisoning during the spraying of crops w toxic chems. 
instruction for operators, also record keeping. 
obligations upon operators not to musise, to take poropercare 
appointment of inspectors 
p478
substances the act will apply to
dinitrophenols and the salts
dinitrosubstituted phenols and their salts
organophosphorus compounds 
preps or misutres continain any of the above. 
substance to which the minister and sec of state may be order direct the act to apply. 

of interest - impact upon preexisting poison law. 
aromatic dinitro weedkillers - ninitro ortho cresol or DNOC and dinitrosecondary butyl phenol DNBP which are not presently subject to the application of poison law reqs. DNOC weedkillers are in the C&D poisons guild Vol 1 (p89) as  anew toe of selective weedkiller. 
poisons law provisions and reqs obviously require revision and extension to safeguard the supply of the poisons that are to be subject to the provisions of this bill. 

March 22 1952
Trade Notes
Scrubb & Co Ltd Wimbledon Factory EState London SW 19
running during the summer months a special Scrubb's dry cleaner service which will be advertised throughout the country and for which special scheme for chemists is in preparation. In seaside rests it find a ready sale for removing pitch and tar from clothed and in the country for removing stains from suits and focus as a result of picnics. 


Generally, the Chemist & Druggist does not advertise household or garden products. The exceptions are moth killer, slug killer and rat / mouse poison. 

This means that I have not seen any adverts for ammonia, stain removal products, garden care products. 

There have been lots of contraceptives / spermicides, hormone products, plasters, herbs, cosmetics, painkillers, antibiotics, bottle and packing/wrapping equipment. 