Chemist and Druggist 1962

p290
Fourth Schedule to the Poisons Rules 1960
sold by retail only upon prescription given by duly qualified med practioner, reg dentist, reg vet surgeon, or reg vet practitioner. 
inc. 
part A
Dinitrocresols (DNC) except preparations for use in agriculture or horticulture. 

Oxalic Acid is still a Part I poison

although in Eire it is a Part II poison. 
must be labelled poison, name of poison, name of seller, address of seller
Poisons and Pharmacy Act 1908
persons licences by the County Councils may sell for:
horticultural purpose
agricultural purposes
sheep dips 
		preps of arsenic
		preps of carbolic acid and its homologies
		preps of tobacco and its alkaloids. 
	
	
carbon tetrachloride, all grades
ICI, pharmaceuticals division
Johnsons of Hendon Ltd
Morons, thomas & Son Ltd
Carbon Tetrachloride Capsules
ICI, Pharm div.  


A lot more adverts for self service displays in 1966, and shop front refurbs. also many sunglasses, cosmetics

February 12 1966 
uproar in the correspondence section when TCP is being sold in grocers. Savlon apparently not. Seems to be a point that advertisers are keen to make - only *you* can sell this product.

feb12 penicillin supplement - 25years

Conditions of Sale
no person shall
supply any drug unless the package or bottle in which it is contained is plainly market with the amount of drug contained therein 
			This section must be what people mean when they say condition of sale. 
			
			
Vol 185 15 Jan 1966
Safe use of chemicals recommendations by MAFF
inc carbamate - herbcide. 
Dichlorovos - resin strips used as insecticide in food storage and in ag/ hort
Fentin acetate - fungicide
DDT for home garden use and gamma BHC. 
Malathion an organophosphorus insecticide and acaricide for vet use
Dinoseb acetate for ag and hort use. 
Tricholophon and organophosphorus insecitde for him garden use and for home, kitchen and larger use. 
thiram - fungicide in home garden use. 
mAFF compounds containing cadmium should not be used in ag or hort. 


Jan 15 1966
New weedkiller packs p59 - May and Baker new 8oz and 20oz Dicotox, carry approval scheme mark. 

Jan8 1966
p24
Ag Chemicals - more approved products
Metaldehyde dry slug baits - Plant protection. 

Jan 8 1966
p35
comment on Joyce Butler's Labelling of Food Bill - comprehensive and far ranging - that feature underlines its weakness. Grouping cosmetic preparations and food causes difficulties and complications. Except that both are purchased, the two groups are dissimilar in almost every respect. The interdependence of the ensues of taste and smell in assessing cosmetic products are likely to require the judgement of a Solomon to separate. Though we criticise the Bill we respect and sympathise with the objective of those who support it as being to avoid the health hazards of absorbing substances. Mrs Butler's Bill has only referred to colourings and flavourings. The cosmetics industry is using other substances, some involving hazards. The industry is aware of that situation and is increasingly active in ensuring that products do not give rise to unto ward effects. If controls are considered necessary then surely the decision should be made on the whole and not the part as the proposed  Bill attempts. 


October 23 1965
p498
Four Pesticides: 
comments sought on draft names
by the BSI. Common name - Benazonli, Quinazamid, 2,4,5-TB, Tropital

Safety Exhibition
Edinburgh opening by Minister
Pharmaceutical Society's "Medicines - With Care" exhibition in Ed. Oct 11 hoped the exhibition would bring home the urgent need to protect, in particular children and old people from unnecessary accidental deaths by poisoning. Staged by the Scottish Dept of the (pharm.) Society.

same page - Drug Mishaps to hildren 
Birkenhead Stats. 
During the first 9 months of the year, 116 children at Birkenhead received hospital tmt for poisoning after taking medicines, drugs and various type of domestic substances. Asprin and other tablets accounted for the most incidents, 22 in all. While drinking bleach and disinfectant resulted in 8 cases. Most instance the means by which poisons were obtained was not established.  
			
			
No comment at all on herbicides or stain removal, or even cleaning. There weren't any bottle collection adverts this time. There were still a lot of bath caps and hot water bottles, but  no shaped ones. There seemed to be less hormone adverts. Pet care - sherley's still got placements. Many ads seemed quite dated - text only, not really trying. The main thrust did seem to be self service stands, shop fittings, pharmaceutical displays. 


