notes Grocers

introduction 
Historians and the nation of shopkeepers
p10
historians need to consider supply as well as demand. Not that they should ignore issues such as changes in  income, or in cultural/social aspirations and adopt some technologically deterministic model where by innovations in production lead inevitably to advances in distribution and retailing. It means that they should look to broader economical, political and social environment which retailers and customers found themselves In particular consider the economic cycle, the nature of local economicl/demographic structures and the impact of legislative and regulatory activity. 
economic cycle (national/ local, periodic/seasonal) was of more importance than is gerneatlly recognised. Not just that economic growth fuelled consumer demand, but economic depression duelled supplier availability.

Street trades provided a refuge for the seasonally unemployed
1934
newspaper article explained how economic depression encouraged the unemployed to move into suburban retiling. (ref 58)

p11
those in power locally, regionally and nationally attempted to influence/ control how retailing developed. late 19/early 20C regulation tended to discourage v small scale retailing (hawking and peddling and suburban shop keeping). Sometimes inadvertently (by enforcing hygiene or public order) but more usually it was deliberate (e.g. enforcing the same closing  hours for all types of outlet)

Chapter 9
Agency ail order in Britain c 1900-2000: spare-time agents and their customers

I'm reading this chapter in the hope that there might be something about chemicals, or photography in here. although I suspect there might not be. 
p227
Royal Welsh Warehouse claimed to be Britains first major mail order retailer (1860) but range of gods was narrow: wool, woollen cloth, clothing. not instalment payments

watch clubs - generate sales of what would usually be an expensive product, through small weekly payments. Boost purchasing power of individuals. Solid platform to launch general mail order retailing after habit of paying weekly had been formed. 

p230
agency mail order - distinguished from retailing via catalogues sent direct to individual customers was a British phenomenon. 
Christmas clubs, burial clubs, crockery, stocking ad other savings clubs were part of everyday experience for working class people in 19C. Women and men who organised them generally wanted to make their own lives more comfortable by supplying a service that was compatible with the modes aspirations of those who lived in the seam street. 
Clubs reflected rhythms and imperatives of working class life. 
agency was the key that allowed catalogue retailers to gain access to millions of homes and use the pre existing social networks to which he spare tie agents belonged. 
British mail order realisers heavily committed to sales via agency, well placed to service the widening material aspirations of working class customers as they crossed threshold of postwar affluence in late 1950s. 
(weekly payments collected by agent)

p237
Littlewoods entered market in 1930s John Moores adpted the slogan 'organise a little woods club and make friends' recognising conviviality. 
emphasis on women organisers (little woods) 
p239
survey conducted by Which? indicated mail order was attractive if you lived far from the shops, were tied to the house or job when shops are open, don't like dragging children round, or feel hurried by shop assistants. Might enjoy transaction conducted in a congenial social situation where they felt at home. 

p240
apply local knowledge rather than apply a formal assessment of creditworthiness. 