Good morning. I'm in my second year of a collaborative doctoral award PhD entitled Chemicals and their Users in the British home, which looks at the1930s to the 1980s. The content of this talk is part of my case study of a herbicide called paraquat. This morning, I'm going to focus on two products based on paraquat; one called Gramoxone and the other Weedol. I'll discuss how they were used in the domestic environment even though one of them certainly wasn't ever meant to be used at home. My main sources have been advertisements, articles and gardening columns in newspapers, because I wanted to see what sort of information was available to people who might use this chemical. I'm going to draw heavily the Daily Mail and The Times, although I have since realised to get a better representation of readership classes, I should also investigate the Daily Express. 

I'm not going to go into the weedkillers available before and at the same time as paraquat, because there isn't time, although I acknowledge that there were other chemicals and branded products for gardeners to use.  

Paraquat, and the closely related chemical diquat, were developed from 1953 by researchers at Plant Protection Limited, which was a subsidiary of Imperial Chemical Industries. They are a type or class of chemicals called bipyridyl quaternary salts, and they showed unusually strong herbicidal action when they were screened to find out what they might be good for. They were rapidly inactivated by clay particles in soil.  William Boon, an ICI biochemist convinced his colleagues that even though this was not how most of the weedkillers currently on the market worked, it could be a useful property. In paraquat's properties Boon saw the potential for, and then developed, not just a herbicide, but a new system of arable farming. The aim of this herbicide was to do away with, or at least reduce ploughing, meaning that moisture would be retained, as well as make land that was hard to plough potentially usable and also avoid soil erosion.  ICI promised that paraquat would boost the nation's total area of productive land, and when exported overseas was set to guarantee riches to the UK's chemical industry. In post-war Britain which was rebuilding its economy, these were powerful motivators to develop a new product. 

ICI's "chemical plough" was introduced to the agricultural and horticultural market in 1962, under the brand name Gramoxone, which had a concentration of active ingredient paraquat at 20%. Gramoxone arrived with farmers as a brown liquid and among the warnings about avoiding contact with skin and eyes, there were instructions that, it should not be decanted from the original containers. You might expect that Gramoxone, not intended for home use, would not be advertised in everyday newspapers. In fact it was. [show adverts] ICI showcased the product in The Times, which suggests that they must have seen a benefit, such as reaching decisions makers, and showing shareholders what they were up to. Here we can see ICI's ideal gramoxone user; he's a farmer, willing to try new technologies, bettering his farm for the long term. No adverts introducing gramoxone were placed in The Daily Mail, perhaps indicating that ICI had decided that this was not a fruitful avenue for them. 

For domestic users or amateur gardeners Plant Protection developed a less concentrated paraquat-based weedkiller called Weedol, which they marketed widely from 1965. The active ingredient, paraquat, was only 5% instead of 20% as it was in gramoxone, although the adverts at this time do not show this.  It was sold as packets of granules or pellets, where the whole 2 ounce packet was to be dissolved directly in a 2 gallon watering can, which reduced the need for the user to measure out or handle the product. The fairly small amount of solution meant that it should all be used up, so that there wouldn't be any left over that people might be tempted to store. In these earliest adverts, [show 1966 advert] we aren't shown a full image of the user but we can see some hands in shirt sleeves, trousered legs which could be gender neutral, but in this case I don't think they are. We're given a lot of information about the product and its benefits, how and where to use it. In slightly later adverts [show 1968 advert], we are shown this domesticated, middle aged man, he's got a bit of a paunch, he knows how to enjoy himself perhaps, he's relaxed, one hand for weeding, one hand for smoking a pipe, he's at leisure in his garden. Women as weeders, as weedkillers, are not shown in any of these adverts. Are women less inclined to use weedkillers, preferring to go round once rather than twice, once for applying and again later to pull up and dispose of the desiccated weeds? Are women supposed to be nurturing rather than destructive? Maybe who actually uses weedkillers, and their reasons, will come through in oral history work or more archival research. 

When Plant Protection were trying to get clearance from the Advisory Committee on Poisonous Substances Used in Agriculture and Food Storage in 1962, they had to show that they had explored not only the beneficial herbicidal outcomes, but also what happened in non-ideal scenarios.  They presented results from acute and chronic LD50 tests on rats, rabbits and a small sample of hens. Death from acute poisoning was possible, but also that at low enough concentrations, paraquat could be eliminated without any apparent effects. Disruption of finger nail growth and nosebleeds in staff packing the chemical had also been observed, explained away by improving the use of gloves and better ventilation. A variety of possible actions were discussed by the scientists on the committee and Plant Protection representatives, but why animals died and why ICI workers had been affected in that way was not known. The benefits of the chemical seemed to outweigh the potential problems, problems that could be avoided if sensible precautions were taken.  

In discussion with MAFF, ICI hoped that humans might be able to better withstand and eliminate the chemical more effectively. Plant Protections were granted approval for their products, under the condition that they collect and report back to the various regulatory boards all known negative effects as a sort of giant field trial, so that the chemical in all marketed forms could be reviewed.  Until 1966, there were no reported fatalities from paraquat anywhere in the world, and it had already been exported to QUANTIFY countries. There had been skin lesions from leaky apparatus leaving agricultural sprayers in contact with gramoxone for prolonged periods, but this had been foreseen and warned against by Plant Protection / ICI. When Weedol users experienced skin problems, user carelessness was the reason cited by Plant Protection.

Paraquat had been introduced to the newspaper reading public through specific columns - those that focused on farming, business and gardening all mentioned paraquat at some point. They talked about the economic benefits that would be available to farmers, gardeners would save time and labour as they were released from weeding paths, driveways and borders. However, when the existence paraquat based herbicides was first introduced, no brand names or trade names were mentioned. The active ingredient, paraquat, was what mattered. When Weedol was marketed, it was occasionally mentioned by the name that would be seen on the packet, but interchangeable with paraquat. 

From January 1966, accidental deaths started to occur, at first in Ireland. ICI decided that the relatively high number of deaths in Ireland when considered in relation to the amount of Gramoxone used was because small scale agricultural users in Ireland had a cultural tendency to buy small amounts in reused, unlabelled containers and that this was not how things were done in England, Scotland and Wales. In addition, the documentation the victim of the first Irish fatal accident in 1966 was described at drunk at the time, all of these descriptions are loaded somehow to emphasise the human error aspect, as well as perhaps some stereotypes. These deaths are not reported in English mainstream newspapers.
 
 The first paraquat related death to be reported in the Daily Mail, The Times and other newspapers was actually the story of the first lung transplant attempted in Europe. The focus of the articles was always the surgical milestone, with the weedkiller in some cases not given any more definition. In this instance, it was a reused, unlabelled container at fault, and the source of the herbicide was an allotment group that had clubbed together to buy it. The victim of accidental poisoning was a teenage boy, described in a BMJ article by surgeons as "intelligent", a departure from the descriptions of Irish accidents relating to mental defects. ICI however, stress the teenage and beer bottle aspect of the incident. The involvement of the allotment society was not discussed in the newspapers, and the coroner worked hard to maintain the family's privacy. None of the surgeons involved in the transplant case would give any details, but the boy's uncle spoke to the press about what had happened. 

All these accidental poisonings, where the common link was an unlabelled familiarly shaped bottle, were linked in some way to agricultural use at some scale. Specific instructions were given on each container of gramoxone, not to repack the chemical. Repacking the herbicide meant that it would become separated from the written warnings, becoming a brown liquid in a bottle. A litany of dark or brown liquids: ribena, cola, beer, stout were named as what gramoxone had been mistaken for.

Accidental poisonings as news items meant that paraquat left the confines of niche gardening and farming columns. They also fed back into the gardening columns, which were often driven by readers' letters, and in 1968 readers of the Times wanted to know why a potentially fatal chemical was being recommended to them. The columnist reiterated the existence of a domestic version which was much safer. For a time, a few extra words were put towards maintaining this distinction in the gardening columns, so that regular readers might be expected to have picked up this difference. 

Nevertheless, in articles about accidental poisoning, found in the main body of the paper hold the chemical paraquat accountable, rather than the brand name Gramoxone. From the description of the herbicide and the amount taken, it is clear that in most cases it was not Weedol, although occasionally for greater emphasis or connection with the reader, Weedol was mentioned as containing paraquat. To a casual newspaper reader who perhaps hasn't had their own experience with any paraquat formulations or packaging, who were skimming or at least not closely reading stories spread out over time, it would be forgivable to come away with the gist that all paraquat products were somehow imbued with the intention of wreaking horrendous death on innocent people.

Each of these accidental poisonings could be attributed to the herbicide being taken - stolen even - from a variety of workplaces where unwanted vegetation was to be cleared by council workers, people maintaining runways and railways, so not just agricultural workers, then stored and labelled inappropriately in a domestic environment.  Adults, teenagers and children were all at risk of mistaking the familiar shapes of drinks bottles for holding harmless contents. What all these stories invariably conveyed was the lack of effective treatment available, often deploying the stock phrase "no known antidote".  As Boon wearily noted, that this statement had been given in good faith to a coroner by a Plant Protection scientist, although it was technically accurate, it was not very unusual as in the true sense of antidote, very few poisons have an antidote. However, it was useful shorthand in newspapers for expressing the horror and despair that was experienced by victims, their families, and the medics who cared for them. Despite doctors' best efforts to deactivate or dilute the chemical in the bloodstream, it was often hard to know how much had been ingested to start with and tests for quantifying paraquat in blood and urine were crude. The lungs were particularly affected, as paraquat causes cell proliferation and inflammation,  described in newspapers as solidifying, which steadily reduced the effectiveness of gas exchange which would usually occur across a single cell thickness. In addition the mouth and throat could also be burned, ulcerated, and the kidneys could also be acutely stressed and permanently damaged. 

Plant Protection were resistant to suggestions that the word "Poison" should be included on the label, preferring the alternative wording "Not to be taken" and "Harmful if taken" or "Dangerous if swallowed" which are really not as hard hitting. They maintained that when users followed the instructions, the product was safe. 

In 1972, marking ten years of paraquat on the market and six years since the first fatality, the Daily Mail took up the cause of accidental paraquat poisoning, focusing on the risk to children.  The newspaper ran their own investigation into how easy it was to obtain Gramoxone and that controls on its retail were not working. Simultaneously, adverts in the Daily Mail for Weedol disappeared in 1972 and apart from one advert I found in 1975, did not appear again regularly until 1978, 6 years of turning down revenue.

The Daily Mail newspaper's active role in educating readers about the dangers of paraquat can also be seen in the MAFF files, in the form of requests for information from their reporters. The files also show civil servants' reactions to articles from the Daily Mail and it shows them learning to anticipate what journalists would be asking for. There was a mixture of relief that the paper was getting across information about storing chemicals safely and following instructions for safe use, but also irritation that the journalists were misreporting and mangling other facts, even that they were appeared to be getting their information from sources other than MAFF. 

Extensive reporting of accidental poisoning was educational because people became more aware of *why* they shouldn't decant industrial strength herbicide into unlabelled bottles, and what the consequences could be of asking a friend for a bit of the amazing weedkiller from their work. 

However, another consequence of reporting fatalities from the chemical was increased visibility, or occurrence, of deliberate poisonings. In  1973 Dr Matthews of the Poisons Board blamed what he called "disproportionate" media coverage given to paraquat deaths for the fact that in Scotland, the number of accidental deaths from paraquat was overshadowed by the number of suicides with the chemical. Weedol featured in numerous para-suicides; the reports in medical journals of this uses of the domestic chemical do not state whether the user knowingly chose this weaker form as a signal of distress, or because they were unaware that the paraquat reported on in most news stories was actually the more potent form Gramoxone.

Murderous paraquat users were portrayed  in the newspapers as adulterous, jealous men and women, in turbulent or unconventional relationships, who administered the weedkiller in sherry, in cups of tea or mixed into stews. These murders were described in salacious detail in the newspaper. In one case, a woman who poisoned her husband even stated that she had got the idea from a story in the newspaper. On this subject, newspapers remained quiet, despite the question of their responsibility for copy-cat behaviour triggering. 

When reporting accidents, journalists were objective towards those who brought the potent chemical home and accidentally poisoned a  family member. However, they didn't mince words when they could be delivered from authority figures. William Boon, father of paraquat, was reported as attributing accidental deaths to "human stupidity". Keeping Gramoxone in unmarked, reused bottles was "asking for it", The Times reported coroner Donal Summerfield as saying in 1969. As poisonings of this type accumulated, a coroner in 1972 was reported as frustratedly saying "when will the public learn?".

MAFF described people who brought home Gramoxone from agricultural or horticultural stocks as trying to avoid the expense of buying Weedol. From the circumstances reported in newspapers, liquid paraquat preparations tended to be brought home by quite young men, who worked in agricultural or horticultural jobs or were in social circles with people who did and could therefore access the high concentration product. One of the accidents occurred in a static caravan park, not generally known for the wealth of their inhabitants. 

Wrapping Up

Paraquat, as both Gramoxone and Weedol, was enthusiastically received in niche newspaper columns. Gramoxone, never intended by the manufacturers for domestic use *was* stored in domestic situations and invited into some private homes and gardens, resulting in fatal poisoning. Despite Gramoxone being on the market since 1964, deaths relating to it were only recorded from 1966, a year into Weedol being widely marketed to home gardeners. 

These unintended uses of paraquat based herbicides brought the chemical to wider attention and media reports of these unintended uses contributed to these uses being perpetuated. 

However, newspapers, especially the Daily Mail, attempted to educate readers to improve their own home's safety through proper storage of all household chemicals. Newspapers rectified the tension between reports of poisonings and continued recommendations to use Weedol in gardening, by stressing that there were different types, even if outside the gardening or farming columns this distinction was not always clear.   

In Weedol adverts that depicted a user, the imagined, perhaps affluent, user  did not match the image of those who were involved in accidental poisoning cases. 

Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your comments and questions. 








