Hello everyone. 

Demographics of audience - find out who you're dealing with here, though don't start from scratch if another performer has already done this, just refer to its make up so that you are making the story relevant to them. 

So... household chemicals! Who uses some? Who has an opinion on them? Excellent.  How come I'm doing a PhD on something so everyday? Because so far, very few historians have looked at 20th century toilet cleaners, weedkillers or stain removers and asked the good old who, what where why questions. I've found a nice and I'm making it mine. I'm actually really lucky to be doing working on this. This is because stories about household chemicals can also be stories about perseverance, tragedy, farce, and death. 

One of the things that I've kept ending up looking at time and again when researching our relationships to household chemicals, is accidental poisoning. 

The number of accidental poisonings with household chemicals pale into insignificance when compared to prescription medicines, and loads of work goes into making safe packaging, and sensible instructions. You've probably done battle with a variety of 'so called safety' lids, I had an office mate who spent a good three nights trying to get into a bottle of drain cleaner, just getting more and more pissed off. He brought the bottle into the office, it was scuffed, there were gouges and teeth marks in it, we looked it up online and discovered  that this was a Really Safe Cap. Probably so safe only its designer could get it off. Those who don't give up wind up in A&E having sliced or punctured the bottle spilling the caustic contents on themselves. 

Why is there this worry that, like moths to a flame, innocent people, because we're not just worried about children here, will be drawn to an otherwise apparently innocuous household chemical and become poisoned by it? I'll tell you why, because people can be incredibly fucking thoughtless. And in the 1930s to the 80s, the time I'm researching, people absolutely loved reusing bottles.  This is a very, very bad combination. 

I've been writing about a weedkiller called paraquat, which came in two types, super strong agricultural liquid concentrate that was not supposed to get into the hands of domestic gardeners, and one that was released a bit later in a different formula, much weaker and in granules, specially to avoid accidental poisoning. The trouble with people is though, is that they do what they want. They don't care that hundreds of hours have been spent discussing why there should be a different kind for a different set of users. They just do what they want. Even though the company and the government wanted this to only be an agricultural chemical, some of the non-agricultural users wanted to use it at home. 

Now, this chemical was launched onto the market with a whole set of safety instructions like wash off splashes and do not repack, which means don't put it into any other container. They didn't say why you should wash off the splashes or why not to repack, and most people got on fine. Everyone was pretty relieved because Lab rats had dutifully died and Government bods were pretty worried about some of the harmful effects that had shown up but they really hoped fingers crossed that humans would be better at dealing with the chemical than the rats. When this product first went onto the market there was no indication to the user that this could be harmful if the instructions weren't followed. 

For a couple of years, everything was absolutely hunky dory, weeds were killed really well and ICI were busy developing their alternative product for home users. but then the accidental poisonings started. Not that many, but even a couple or 5 a year world wide was really enough. Maybe the initial caution about a new product had worn off, maybe it was the increased number of people using it. What connected the accidents was the instruction 'not to be repacked'. All these accidental poisonings came from mistakenly drinking the herbicide after it had been put into a drinks bottle. 

Do not repack seemed to work like do not touch, or do not press this fabulous red button.  it wasn't like it couldn't technically be done, as a liquid it was pretty easy to get from the big bottle into a small one. [Some of the earliest accidental poisonings happened in Ireland, which the company said was specifically due to people turning up with all kinds of containers - teacups, bottles, jars, chamber pots - they didn't need large quantities because they only had small farms, and culturally, this kind of thing always happened, and this seemed to open the floodgates to a whole load of old stereotypes and Irish jokes in the reports, where drunkenness was a factor in these accidents. ] 

There was a bit of a stand-off between the manufacturing company and the government,  about putting the word poison on the bottle. This would explain to people why it should be handled carefully, or that it shouldn't be put into a different container.   But what the company was worried about was that  The word Poison you see, puts people off wanting to use a product. The very word 'poison' gives people ideas about non-accidental poisoning, if you get my drift.  

However, quite a lot of people do have experience of handling fecking strong chemicals at work, and some of those people don't see why they should pay for something that they handle everyday when they only need a little bit for their driveway at home, or their garden. Petty pilfering from the work place happens all the time, except agrochemicals are a lot more likely to kill people than say, biros, you'd have to end up under an avalanche of biros, or maybe somehow impaled on biros. So bear that in mind, don't acquire too many biros, and arrange them safely...

The trouble is, that although you might be able to handle these things perfectly safely at work, your family might not. Especially when you don't take the label off the drinks bottle, or make new label for your bottle in case anyone was to find it, or you were to say, forget. So some incredibly tragic accidents happened when dads brought home some super strong weedkiller in coke bottles and they were eagerly snaffled up by kids rummaging in dads bag looking for treats. A glove compartment might seem like a reasonably safe place to store weedkiller, but not to a thirsty passenger who generally does not expect to find agrochemicals in a bottle in a car, they expect lemonade, or coke so when they finds a bottle in there, they're going to take a swig. Wives tidying up put beer bottles in the fridge which actually contained the herbicide, and the very folk who brought them into the house died a horrible death. The response from the company was pretty much 'well, we did tell them not to put it in any other bottle'.  

For anyone hoping I was going to come up here and do some kind of mystery substance in a bottle drinking roulette, you are going to be disappointed. Dog food vs tinned macaroni roulette was actually one of the best standup comedy gigs I've been to for a while. but I really don't fancy the oral burns or solidification of my lungs, the general tendency to death associated with the chemicals I've been researching. Plus, paraquat is banned now in the EU and although I've spotted some in the science museum, I don't think that the curators would deem potential on-stage suicide a suitable use of a museum object. It could lend a sample straight from the lab some interesting additional provenance, but they'd probably prefer it not to be used like that.

Casting around for ways to stop this type of accident happening, a local government chap up in Scotland fixated on the bottles, rather than the contents, as being the problem. The company were working on the contents but there must be something that could be done in the meantime, wasn't there? He decided the solution to the problem of reusing drinks bottles, would be to disallow or to criminalise people putting anything other than delicious lemonade, cola, beers or wines in their drinks bottles. He hadn't managed to formulate a way of actually enforcing this, so you'd probably still have to have people accidentally poisoning themselves in order to detect who was reusing bottles. 

When an accidental poisoning took place, the grief and remorse was enough for the person who brought it home and I didn't actually find any examples of people being punished any further, other than an employee of ICI who was dealt with internally. I don't know whether he'd imagined some kind of special agency going round house to house, knocking on doors and checking that nobody was putting noxious chemicals into drinks bottles. Can you imagine that being your job? That would possibly be worse than being a traffic warden.  You'd probably have to describe your job as 'domestic bottle anti reuse compliance officer' or something groan worthy.  How would it even work? Mr Jamieson,  records show that you purchased 10 bottles of coke yet only 8 have been returned. Where are the others? Well, they broke and I threw them away. A team is sent to hunt down the pieces and painstakingly reconstruct the bottles from the shards. This is only enough pieces for 1 bottle and you end up in prison having to explain to murderers and thieves and rapists that you were there because you couldn't account for how traces of herbicide had got onto a bottle that you'd broken and thrown away...

Local government chappy's  concern followed the full journey of putting poisons in bottles, right through to the logical conclusion of the day, which was when bottles were returned for the cash deposit, they might still contain a harmful residue that could affect an unsuspecting person further down the line. Here, I can kind of see his point. I used to work with fish and chemicals, where at the end of a lethal dose 50 experiment all the fish tanks would be taken outside, into a skip, not just in the road, and smashed. Why smashed? They didn't used to be smashed up but someone who thought that animal testing only happens to fluffy beasts had seen the tanks in the skip, and reclaimed them for a lovely home aquarium. All nicely set up with the little castle and scuba diver model and weeds and pumps, only to come down and find the fish floating lifeless at the top of the tank... So if you were going to worry about what happens when people put unknown, strong, poisonous chemicals in bottles, you can get his point. This idea was poo-pooed in Whitehall, based on how nobody had been mysteriously poisoned from the bottle reuse system before, so they weren't going to start on this system now. 

So be glad that you're free to put what you like into bottles, that you're left to be responsible to your family or housemates  


=================


Accidental poisoning with household chemicals has been a pretty big worry. That some people keep an arsenal of chemicals on hand under the kitchen sink, or in the garden shed, does indeed worry some people, often the people who prefer not to keep these things in their cosy domestic spaces. 

Accidental poisoning with things like bleach historically didn't actually happen as often as I initially thought it might, prescribed pharmaceuticals are the big culprit there. However, accidental poisonings happen often enough for some pretty predictable fuss to be kicked up for 'something to be done'. You're all pretty familiar with how household and garden chemicals are presented to us now, I'm hoping anyway. Even if you maybe don't have a garden or a yard to keep weed-free, you at least keep a toilet nice and clean, right? Maybe you've walked down an aisle in a shop and been bewildered by choices of brightly coloured bottles of promises. Or maybe because this is Jericho and a bit alternative, you head straight for the acetic acid and bicarbonate of soda, I don't know. Anyway, there have been some pretty standard responses to preventing accidents and accidental poisoning with household and garden chemicals at the time I've been looking at, the not so distant past of the 1980s back to the 1930s.  There have been design changes for the packaging, grippy plastic bottles replaced slippery, smash-able glass, you have probably done battle with a variety of child proof lids, which arguably can make a product more dangerous when people desperately take knives, saws and their own teeth to bottles of caustic drain cleaners.

 Changing the packaging generally meant putting it into an easily distinguishable bottle so that disinfecting fluid couldn't be so easily mistaken for indigestion remedies, or spirits.  Putting an informative label on a product is fraught with problems and masses of research went into working out what symbols would be universally meaningful, or at least deterrent. Skull and cross bones seems so obvious now doesn't it, though in some trials with young children they said it meant that it was pirate food. Charming. Sometimes a products' colour can be changed so it isn't mistaken for something else, but this isn't always possible change its colour (not always possible, the market for absurdly fluorescent coloured drinks that has developed perhaps shows that changing the colour might not really deter anyone from drinking it) and make it smell so gaggingly awful so that accidentally drinking it becomes harder. 


Despite the company attending many, many meetings with government representatives, where they all discussed how they could put this really effective weed killer on the market and boost the farming and chemical industries in one fell swoop, whilst also preventing mishaps to their users. They'd done some animal tests, and they really hoped that humans would be better at dealing with the chemicals than the rats were. p, but this chemical had big potential to really bring in the cash. Still, it's a bloody good herbicide which could revolutionise farming, saving on fuel for tractors, improving pasture which can make fatter sheep, make cows make more milk, employ people in factories that make it, so yeah lets give it provisional clearance - put it out there, keep an eye on what happens and we'll tweak instructions and stuff like that when we see how it's used in real life, was the outcome of all these meetings. 

If we hope that everyone did read the label, which to be honest, who always reads everything on the label? You might not even see the label if someone else is making up the weedkiller spray for you, then you get into all that weird relying on someone else's approval, someone else has essentially vetted it for you, a bit like everyone else is doing this thing, it must be fine, or ending up going out with someone's mate because, well, they wouldn't be mates with them if they weren't alright.
