Harried leisure Classes
Linder

writing about time
p2
scarce commodity
supply of time
demand for time
goods combined with time
consumption requires time, just as production does

p4
Walter Kerr *the Decline of Pleasure* "We are all of us compelled to read for profit, party for contacts, lunch for contracts, bowl for unity, drive for milage, gamble for charity, go out for the evening for the greater glory of the municipality and stay home for the weekend to rebuild the house."

increase the amount of consumer goods to be enjoyed per time unit. Consumer time can give a higher yield when combined with more consumer goods. 
p5
increasing volume of consumer goods will not ned raise the demand for consumption time, but the reverse. Many goods, it is claim, save time. 

"consumption goods" in this book mean the defininte end products that are combined with time in an attempt to create material or spiritual well being. 
Washing machines = increase productivity in working life , in this case work performed within household.  Not make distinction between activities within households and in production  - many are identical. 

p60
theories of decision making 
- individual's awareness in attempts to achieve some form of happiness
- the individual's knowledge of the alternatives

collecting information on alternatives is time consuming. Time required by decision making is a particular component in what is maintenance time/ personal work. As scarcityy of time changes, the amount of time allocated to decision making is affected. 
p61
rationality - fully knowing and understanding alternatives is a simplification and unrealistic

p62
information is not available gratis and has to be acquired by search. Alts discovered and investigated, but not in accordance with any complete system that guarantees optimal results. One stops at alternative judged to be satisfactory in relation to the ambition level when adopted, or as the the term is "satisficing". Procession of search can be continued to gradually find superior alternatives. always act from inadequate knowledge, external circus are gradually changing and altering the advantages and drawbacks of the alternatives. (Herbert Simon)

p63
uncertainty can be reduced by collecting in formation. But this can only be gained at a cost. This has to be weighed against the value of the greater knowledge acquired. 

p64
George Stigler
"Ignorance is like subzero weather: by a sufficient expenditure its effects upon people can be kept within tolerable or even comfortable bounds, but it would be wholly uneconomic entirely to eliminate all its effects .... understanding o economic life will be incomplete if we do not systematically take account of the cold winds of ignorance." 

p67
develop a taste for being well informed. Difference in attitude will counteract the force that would in itself lead to our cutting down the time devoted to different decisions. 
p68
J West 2 year study in Canad - 37% of all purchases classified as impulse purchases. 
Treat stores as giant catalog, compose week's meals as wander around (what's wrong with this?)
p69
both high and low income earners spent less time on relocation. That high income earners should have collect dless information fits thesis of declining quality of decisions. That low incomes earners do this is in conflict with it. Explanation may be that their low level of equation meant low yield on time spend in the collection of information. [!!]

higher price= good, not such a folly, may be a reasonable rule of thumb to equate price with quality. Mistakes made in this way may be less expensive than the efforts that would be required to avoid them by acquiring better information. 
consumers almost always acting under uncertainty with repeat to many aspects, on the look out for all kinds of cues that can help in decision making. 

judge quantity from the size of the packaging. 

p70
advertising - 2 functions as 2 diff kinds of info to be disseminated. 
p71
 - making factual knowledge more accessible than otherwise. 
 - Provides quasi information for people who lack time to acquire genuine insights. 
 - advertising is surrogate information in order to feel that they are making the right decision. 
 - advertisers make use of recipient information costs: gain effect yb cutting down the recipients information costs, then explode propensity to accept persuasion when unwilling to devote time to collecting info for independent information. Helps to close the info ration gap, at the same time exploiting the information gap. 
- one and the same advert can fulfil the two purposes. households have fewer resources than firms to effete thorough investigation before procurement. 

ersatz information. 
provide motive for action for which no solid argument exists. Routine purchasingg procedures gain in importance as a means of reducing decision making time. 

p73 
people can be made victims of persuasion not because they are irrational, but because they are rational. As rational people they are not prepared to spedn all their time gatheringg information on the best things to buy. p74 only unintelligent buyers acquire complete information. 
