Reaction

Clambake - Elvis film - is a chemist
Chemical themes and characters have been capturing the imaginations of audiences for more than a century. Appear in surprising and signimigcant ways, generating some of the most enduring fictions and motifs in movie history and thus the cuutre at large. 

“Chemistry is the only science that shares its name with an industry, and as such, it carries the heavy associative burden of some negative uses of its discoveries.” p4

p5 “Chemicsty is powerful: It has the potential to damage, possibl beyond habitation, the planet that is our home. It can take life indiscriminately and ruin healthy and property. Could one ask for a more potent force? Its responsible use is necesary for our survival.”

p7 more women chemists on screen in the 1930s through 50s than there have been since (still v low - 3-7 films per 4yrs) . contrasts poorly with the rise in physical chemistry PhDs earned by women in US universities.  


Compares films - chemical themes and movie genre signature. Dark side movies (Jekyll and Hyde, Invisible man, chem weapons, bad companies, addiction) were rich in thrillers horror and sci- fi whears brightside movies were rich in biography mystery and romance (inventors, forensics, in the classroom, good researchers, drug discovery)


p12 - becayse the compound is not named in the original or dramatic adaptations, it becomes possible to transfer our anxiety about any new phsychophramacuetical to the Hyde compound. If the active ingredient had been named, the adaptations might have told the tale of the chemical not the transformation. The book and movies are tales of science anxiety, not science. 

Goes into detail that probably isn’t relevant about working out from the written descriptions of the reactions what the chemicals involved might have been and why the author would have known about them.

p19 
Rosslynn Haynes 1994 0 6 recurrent types of scientists in lit and film
	the alchemist - obsessed maniacal
	stupid virtuoso - out of touch with the real world
	unfeeling scientits - reneged on human rships suppresed huamn feeling
	heroic adventurere explores new territories adn is a mental giant
	helpless sci who loses control over own discovery 
	idealist - unambiguously acceptable stereotype

p24 - a number of visual puns in *The Nutty  Professor* 1963 can only be fully appreciated after seeing the Paramount 1931 Jekyll and Hyde

Invisibility steals the seen
Chemistry creates criminal opportunities


Hyde formual and invisibility drug accumulate more realistic druglike properites with every adaptation. Earlies J&H films, formula is permanent until antidote is taken or phsychologically triggered. 1960 version, pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics are much better - drug doesn’t cause immediate tranformation, effet werars off after four days, spontaneiously reverts as compund is metabolised. 

Either public  understanding of disease and ther causes increased dramatically in the 1940s or Holywood was offering science to counter irrational fear durin gWWII even in its horror films. re. curing Dracula with vaccine. 
side effects of invisibility formula - always. monocaoine causes insantiy in the Invisilble Man 1933. Side effects demonstrate the principle that the drugs will affect all users differently, as metabolism is different. 

p37
Invisible woman drinks alcohol and discovers invisibility lasts longer - 1942 was common knowledge that alcohol overwhelms liver’s enzymes so that it metabolises some drugs more slowly.


-caine suffix signifies local anaesthetic, can’t feel tissue, as if it isn’t there. cocain is a local aneasthectic, insantiy following monocaine is cocaine addiction.

1933 film, employer worries that Jack is unaware of a research project published in an obscure journal - Jack’s poor scholarship lets down his great experimental work. 

p56
seeing things that are invisible - how to detect the invisable, dangerous mad man - thow ink on him, look for his breath, use a net to prove he’s not in the room. p57“I meddled in things that man must leave alone”

p65 
Sept 2001 citizens advised to protect selves from toxic dust using plastic sheeting and duct tape over windows, easily available but citizens woud not have had access to this before cheap polythene technology. 100 yrs ago terrorist would not have had ready access to today’s common chemicals to creat makeshift explosives. chemical weapons have engendered a cloud of fear since their introduction into warfare WWI. Large scale use of chemicals  as lethal weapons has drifted from warefare to terrorism. 

Chem weapons oftn equated with poision gases - asphixiation ornerve agents, but are most diverse weapon - phsychadelic and explosives inc. 

Bell Diamond 1986 - defoliant
Moonraker 1979 Nerve agent
Dr Strangelove 1964 Fluoride
Incredible shrinking man 1957 Insecticide and nuclear fallout
Sabotage agent 1943 Poison gas
Testabment of Dr Mabuse 1933 poison gas adn chemical fire 

p73
Geneva Protocol 1925 Protocol for the Prohibition of th euse in war of asphyxiating , poisonous or other gases, and of bacterial methods of warfare.” 
twothirds of the signing countries did so with the vaeat that they would not use them first, leaving their options open to use it in retailiation. No mehtod of enforcement, no retailation owhen it was boriken - Japan signed in 1925 but broke it against China in 1938, Iraq signed in 1931 but broke in 1983 abainst Iran, Italiy ratifie in 1938 and broke it in 1945 against Abyssinia

Zyclon B developed under guis of pest control - 1920. Used in WWII Zyklon B is liquid hydrogen cyanide n an inert pourous solid support, eg diatomaceous earth, 

p76 good graph showing transition from Sabotage and Saboteur theme to Terrorism and Terrorist

Sabotage peaks in the 40s ab about 80 films, decreases to 25 in the 1950s decreases again the the 60s (20) and 70s, while terrorism remains low~5 films per year, 1930s-60s increasing to 30 in 1970, 65 in the 80s, 90 in the 90s and 145 in the 2000s. 

p77
invisibility of terrorist actos goes hand in hand with the imperceptibility of their weapons. By using common chemicals that escape detection in crudely destructive ways, the terrorists of today have our chemical world at their disposal. Swift transition from normalcy to nightmare with substancs as ubiquitous as fertiliser, jet fuel, peroxide plus acetone, 

p78 progress oriented culture - weapons don’t have to be developed from advanced technologies to have devastating impact - common substances in large enough quantities or unsable mixtures will serve perverted interests fine. 

Fear functions very efficiently, able to reply it again and again in our minds. Terroisim is extreme fear, curouios doubling of the fear when used wth the word threat - extendes the fear into the future of no known end point and the thread may  not be fully knowable or measurale. Empty threats and hoaxes cause great disruption keeping fear alive serves interests of terrorists. 

Dr Mabuse - features fire at chemical plant which cannot be put out, is made worse by using water. 

Dr Strangelove - Ripper will only drink distilled water, rainwater and grain aocohol - the govt sponsored water fluouridation projects are proof of a Communist plot within the US (to do what?)  Ripper explains there are studies underw ay to fluoridate a vaiety of other products including Icecream for children. A Foreign substance was introduced into the water supply against his personal choice. 

Shrinking Man - passes through a scintillating cloud, is told that he’s had a rearrangement of molecular structure, an anti cancer. Has he been exposed to insecticide “yes, two months ago”then i asked about exposure to raioactivity, Scott remebers the mist on the boat. 
relates to 1954 crew of Japanese fishing boat sailing through cloud of fallout from US hydrogen bomb test on Pacific atoll. rescient that 1959 supposes the inseccticides were carcinogenic. 

Sabotage Agent, aka Adventures of Tartu 1943 - bomb defuser with a chem eng degree. Goes undercover to a chem fac in Czechoslovakia to blwow it up and end the production of poison gas fo NAzis. Night Befre the Divorce 1942 is another film with a lead character of a chemical engineer. 

p105 
Riders of the Whistling pines 1949 - DDT −1st movie to have DDT in narrative, deal with tussock moth infestation
I know where I’m going - war chemicals 1947
Soylent green 1973 - industrial ecodisaster
One Man 1977 - gasoline additive
Incredible shrinkign woman  1981 - household products - 

films that don’t take chem cos to task but have something to say about our culture of consumption - SG, ISW 


Riders of the Whistling Pines - Gene Autry leaerned that forestersw ere using planes to spray forests to eradiacte a tussok moth infestation - had screen writer Jack townley develop the story, DDT was only just being used to control gypsy moths and virtually no reports of DDT being harmful to lead the townsfolk into discussing how it might kill other animals too. Vet announces he’s examined 20 dead animals, Autyr must have miscalculated the amt DDT, asks not to spread info says it was tested(Audience laugh here - no result ie good or bad, just tested)  Duchemin 2007 says that Autry was about 20yrs ahead of his time in producing  astory with an environmental theme. 

I know where I’m going - CCI - consolidaed chemical industries very close to ICI imperial chemical industries - Gellenger getting richer by supplying chemical needs during a war that he is carfeully avoiding. Makes it clear he does not know how to live an auhentic life despite his money showing he is bankrupt on that score as well. 

Silkwood - whistleblower, health and safety, fraudulent, plutonium

ISW - receives prototypes from husband, ad exec, buys household products from neighbours and buys many from the store. Various chemical mixtures, dangerous mixtures do exist in easily obtainable chem products. 

1989 - Batman 
Thug Jack Napier is disfigured in a vat of chemicals so he uses cosmeics to cover his face; he creates a poison neamed Smile that forms when certain personal care products are mixed. The joker uses his chemical skills off screen to create and market an netire line of personal care products - untraceable toxin to form when two products are mixed eg hairspray with lipstick. 


1952 - Monkey Business
A chimp copies the actions of a scientist in the lab and creates a youth elixr

Clambake 1967 - Goop could be a real hard varnish, but developed and untested before being applied on to a racing boat 

Forever Darling 1956 - chemist works day and night, neglecting his wife but decides to say that she’s coming with him to test his product on insects around the world. She is enventually convinced to accompany him. “you scientistsare goign to blow up the worl” That’s a sore point with scientists. We just want ot make the world a better place to live in “For everyboy except your wives”/. One of the few movies to explore work hom life balance, still considered fully humanitariuan to develop an insectiicdein 1956. 

1935 The Love Test woman is made head of dept, peeople don’t want to take orders from a woman so try to distract her by falling in love, she becomes more womanly and attractive, someone does fall in love with her and also develops the chem product they were looking for. Creative use of chemical imagary, says tha tthi is the arliest eixting movie to feature a woman chemist. posita aworld in which there are equal numbers of women and men chemist, making it seem less unusual when a woman is selected as cheif chemist. [ We have seen that there were occasions where labs were staffed predominantly by women]
