Tim Boon

chemists, chemistry, Festival of Britain not included in the index, though chemists are occasionally mentioned (as an occupation, or type of scientist, rather than anything about chemicals) in the text

p235
. ...Celebration [of scientific and technological modernity] should be tempered with envoronmentalist sobrietry, though it for many years was unusal to have scientists with opposing views debating in a single section of a programme.  2d ever Horizon episode was Pesticides and Posterity 20 May 1964
contrasting views of ecologist Frank Fraser Darling and industrial chemist Eric Edson before concluding with a studio discussion  - - see Gardner and Young 81 -p177-8

in Mae Made Laes of Africa 20 Mar 1972 - env impact of the Volta nad Aswan dams. Specific historical circumstance altered how science techn and medicine were represented to the public. Exp after the 1973 oil crist, television, particularly in current affairs mode, featured the environmentla critique strongly. 

Scientists have often considered public communication activities to diminish the seriousness with which the popularlisers scientific work is seen (Gregory and Miller 1998, 82-83

p237
Aubrey Singer identified the atomic bomb as opening up public awareness of the size, cost and power of science. the petitioning by scientific organisation sof the BBC in the quarter century from 1941, esp 1949 was second only in persistence to their apprpaches to govt. Organised sicnece placed a high value on creatiing a positive opiion of science. Cold WAr - concern with public representation reached a head Pilkington Committee. 

Television producers wre keen to convey a view of sicence that scientists approved of. broadcasters were keen that scientiss should speak and be seen themselves as fulfilling this role. 

p238
boadning of genres [away from pure natural history] was a distant effect of significant changes in society that affected science and representation alike. The culture that was concerned in the 1950s and 60s with atomic weapons, nulear power and DDT with en causes of many kinds and protest against Vietnam, also produced new more highly theorised concerns about science tech and society. 

p239 
Ch 4 Crucibe: Science in Society. aimed to introduce critical account of topic into television science ‘ to contribute to an atmostpher in which it could be flet by ordinary people that they should hold view son such matters’. 
Young 1986
Gardner and Young 1081

Bodmer Report 1985 and establishement of the Comittee on the Public Understanding of Science (COPUS) in 1986, scientific organiseations once again petitioned boradcasters about the telvisual presentation of science, as they had between 1941 and 1962.  

BBC broadedn responsibility for production of sci programmes beyond the successors to Aubry Singer’s Features and Science dept of 1963, which had been home for virtually all significant coverage of science. 


p77 
Shell Film unit founded in 1934. 
Alex Wolcough head of dept - aims of fim proramme “To improve the efficiency of the Shell organisation by creaing a greater knowledge of its poructs, and by teaching modern mehods of marketing; to help improve the demand fo Shell products; to creae general goodwill with perhaps no immediate or direcly traceable return’ in Gordon 1999 2-3

lots of things about smoke pollution - something that could be readily sensed by people - visible problems, feel bad in self.coughing lungs etc, smell.(p108 - nationa smoke abatement society never mentioned vitamins (D)  at all, only lung disease and psychological gloom induced by darkness, though typical of those who championed the sciencific method in medicine to stress vitamins, which to them proclaimed the validity of the scientific approach)

p82
Hogben 
cinema ‘ university of the futue’ - particular purpose in relation to science - sweep away mystification normally caused by popular science and repliace it with a functionalist view.  
“to make mnaind aware that science eaches the possilbity of plenty to the people by the peopel and for the poeple, we have got to transate it into the vernacular. ... Education for the age of pletny means showin people that sicnece is not a myster. It is organised workmanship. This cna only be done if you show people how science has arisen out of the comon experience of mankind to meet the common needs of mankind.” (1936a, p8)

scientific citizenship, link documentaries and social role of sicnce

p83
“Edcation for citizen ship demands a knowledge of how science is musuesd, how we fail to make the fullest use of science for our social well-being, and, in short, a vision wo what human life could be if we planned our resources inelligently.”(1937, 123)

p92
‘public science’ can be dated to at least 1880 (Turner 1980), apologists of professional science not quick to turn to cinema, most of cinemas’ first 4 dcades where sci was present in films it was as lay natuarl history. Technology qua industry, but only in the mid 1930s that such representation sbecame resolutely modernistic and began to oncentrate on the higher technologies of telecommunications and electricity. Only with Enough to Eat? do we see emergence of novel form of sci film, projecting the scientists as an agent of moral concern. 





Eye on research - outside broadcasts 1957-61 

restless sphere - 

James McCloy producing frontiers of Science, wrote to Singer about differntialting the new seriesfrom his own, proposing that it be limited to industiral reserach. 
since I cannot do satisfacoty stuiod programmeson these industrial porjces in the studio it seems a pity to waste OBs on pure science and pedicine that really demand a studio tmt. 
ignored request to avoid competition. m,   Z```````````````````````````````````
