Experts and expertise

lay expert is an oxymoron - do not use this unless I want to argue with someone, or I explain that I know it is. 

experience based expertise
uncertified

narrow specialist - eg computer buffs, computer cos nurture lead users, who then acquire contributory expertise recognised by the companies who consult them as experts

users or active non users of an object are integral to the establishment of meaning and sucess fo an object. Contributory expertise here shapes the future desinga form and dfunction. New socilogy of technology see ref 75. Still a political dimension - eg cars, preferring deisngs which minimize fuel consumptions and tax regimes which discourage pollution. Rights of the public as public and the public as car drivers are hard to untangle. Preferences, pressures and rights are represented as belonging in the botom half of the diagram - though borerline problesm.

When an environmental decision has to be made (e.g. climate change) - historial (dealing with historical trends rather than laboratory tests, ecological effects) reflexifx hist sce even greater potential fo uncertainty as outcomes are affected by actions of human beings, so includes outcome of politicl and ethical debates and golem science (potential to become normal science, not yet reached closure) - similar as sci input is equally uncertain but different in that golem science can eventually reach certainty through normal sci processes, which cannot occur in historical scieces. Relflexive hisotrical sciences cannot be approached without social or cultural regulation. Society needs certified and expereinced based expretise in the scientific fieleds bleoning to the problem, as well as political input. In relexive his sci, politics policy regulation and socilogy enter so their respective expertises are needed too. 

decision making rights that emerge from the political sphere and those that grow out of expertise should not be confounded. Boundary between political sphere and sphere of expertise is now found between groups of specialists and th rest, not a class of professional accredited experts and the rest. 

institutions are needed that can translate the knowledge of pockets of experiece based expertise to make it less easy for certified scientists to resist their adice. Such bodies of experts already exst, but tende to be associated with campaigning organisation. 

In some situations there should be less public involvment in technical decision making. (e.g. train-spent fuel test and aircraft fuel) [though this was really to do with the format and execution of the tests chosen for public demonstration and their subsequent explanations]


Jasonoff responds:
waves are seen as chronological and science studies is periodised by these means with regard to one issue - expertise and principles for publice engagement
Wave one - positivise in which expertise was taken for granded and unproblematic. esoteric and authoritative. 
Wave two - unbridaled social constructivism, relativism about foundations of expert knowledge
too much/ too little need better conceptual tools with which to determin how much is just right in any given situation. 
abstruse diagrams. complex architecture for issue that is far older than the conerns of comtemp sci stucies
overly neat periodiziations look specious. reductionst quality sits uneasily with complex dynamics of expertise
[what they describe as] Wave two does not obsess about relativsm. mutual embedding of natuarl knolwedge and social order - their co production - which gives this work stayin gpower.  Different perceptions of uncertainty , predictablility and control between ifferent groups, not simply additive, but radically other wasy of understanding the world. 
not one of the authors (Leviathan and the Airpump, decsnet of icarus, science in action) essentialises expertise, showing it instead to be always contingen historically situated and grounded in practice. How would these books have affaected their wave theory if they had been taken on board. 

Jasonoff says that she doesn’t recognise herself/her work in the descriptions and prese of C&E - denuded of central meaning. She has always inststed that expertise iis not merely something in the heads and hadns of skilled persons, contutited through their deep familiary with the problem in question, bur rather that it is something acquired and deployed within particular historical, political and cultural contexts. Expertise relevant to public decisions responds to specific instutional imperatives that vary within and between nation states. Who counts as an expert in UK env or public health controversies may not necessarily be who or what would count for the same place in different countires. eg quantitative risk assessment has gained a reputaion for objectivity in the USA that it does not enjoy to anything like the same degree in European regulatory circles. What operates as credible expertise in any society corresponds to distinctive civic epistemology - the criteria by which members of that society systematically evaluate the validty of public knowledge. In USA expectations openess transparaency and the right to look behind formal claims are deeply engrained in instutional practices. Expectation influence the processes by which the public relate to experts but also the content and discourse of expertise. 

metaphor of waves is powerful but circle diagrams do not embody the same unstoppable inevitable force of moon-drawn oceans. Long waves of scholarship no more susceptible to containment than waves that break in long lines on our earthly shores. 

Wynne responds

C&E’s implicit assumption is that the problem of public legitamcy for science is rooted in the way that people with authentic but unrecognised expertise are denied access to expert deliberation about decisions. 
Wynne suggests that this is more about the instutional neglect of issues of public meaning and the imposition of meanings adn identities on publics and the public domain. 
Wynne says he raises neglected questions about how proper kowledge for relatively new domains like environmental and risk problems should be negotiated as matters of civic epistemology and how we have by default allowed previously institutionalised epistemic commitments to be extended to such domains with inadequate collective reflectionand debate.

C&E reduce public policy and the larger public arena in which negitations of meaning authority and legitimacy take place to what Habermas long ago critically dismisses as decisionism. This is a model in which policy and political processes are conceptualised exclusively as a series of completely unrelated specific decisions, each one of which has no interaction with any other. The deletion of context and atomisation of the public policy sphere allows C&E to imagine that scientifically dense issues that arise in the public domain have objective meanings which are not themselves problematic in terms of irings or substance. 

Whilst public opposition is defined as a misunderstanding or wilful rejection of science, it is more inspired by public alienation from the responsible institutieons insistently imposed frames of meaning, including the convinced view that publice reactions are framed within the meaning of risk as defined by science. ... Reduction of issues to one of science alone consistent with 3rd Wave approach deletes altogether the many other dimensions of the GM crops issue which people define as its meaning. Inc the problematic institutional culture that routinely denies public issues involving science in this scientistic way and that routinely exaggerates the power of science through risk assessment to anticipate and control future consequesces. Wynne 2001 (et al and same year) 

Disinterested citien 
while it is true that experts will also be citizens somewhere and lay people in relation to other debates, the crucial argument is that in any specific case a citizen cannot be an expert and a nonexpert at the same time. Only those who are nonexperts with regard to the science in question can authentically represent the lay perspective implied in calls for the democratization of science.

“holding an expertise that is not ubiquitous underines claims to be speaking for ‘citizens in general’.  Those iwht specialised expertise are more accurately seen as represetnatives of particular epistemic communities such as scientists, farm workers, env activits etc. They may speak to the members of wider soc but cannot claim to speak for them. 

interactional = talking the talk vs walking the walk = contributional.

ubiquitous tacit knowledge: beermat knowledge, pupular understanding from secondary or pupular accounts and using this move onto the primary literature for that doman. Because this knowledge can be achieved using largley everyday skills such as reading, sufficently determined individuals are able to gain sig levels of expertise w/o ever meeting a practicioner. What differentiates these kinds of expertise, which are clearly not trivial, from interactional expertise is that interatctional expertise also inludes the tacit, social nand cultural knolwdeges that are specific to the expert group and can only be gained through interaction. 
Connoisseurship - judgements about what is good or bad, based on criteria internal to the expert domain but can be made by non practiicionser. The idea of recogniszin that something is done well according to the conventions of its own genre can be applied more wiely. The concept of reffered epertise = having expertise in one domain assists in making judegements about a related domain. Downward discriminatino - ability to see that nother person ahs made a mistake, may not require vast amount of expertise, is a relative judgement but can be highly effective. 

Relevant expertise = sustained experience in that domain. This avoids making every citizen an expert but does not limit expert status to qualified scientists and other credentialed experts. From this perspective scientists are recognized as experts not becaue of their qualifications, but because of their sustained engaagement with aparticular topic or issue. Claims to relevance and knowldege made by patient groups, social movement st and other organic experts (Plows 2003) are grounded in sustained engagement, their claims to expert status cannot be dismissed simply because they lack formal certification.   (p836)
activist groups recognised that they needed to increase their knowledge if they were to engage effectiviely - to use the language - and set about educating themselves accordingly. 

Although activitst may not posses formal certificates to validate their claims to expertise, they have, as a reslut of prolonged engagement with a particular debate or controversy developed interactional expertise in these areas. Sustained and detailed technical critiques by activists using peer reviewed sci literature = evidence that expertise is developed. 
Activists and scientific communites do not exist in separaate universes. Activists monitor sci innovation in a range of ways. Specialist organisatino do the hard work of tracking research and policy. Personal contact with sci community provides a resource through which insider knowledge filters back to the wider network. Boundary shifters - move between different social networks - Pinch and Trocco 2002  (p837)

activists and scientists both - rsearch and disseminate, networks are close, ties are personal, production and circulation of texts is endemic, regular meetins where membership is displayed and confirmed. ref 21 (p838)
If activists are experts, like scientists, then they should also be made accountable and subject to scrutiny by wider society (p838)

(Identifiable victim) using real stories and pictures - something the scientific community has been reluctant to do, because, you know, it’s emotions, and that’s not what the scientific comunity are about. As patient groups, we do [it for them]. ref 23 p289

...the more individual citizens particupate in esoteric science - that is, the more engaged they become - the less normal and ordinary they are. In other owrds, if citizens are to be free of prejudice and not co-opted by interest groups on either side, then the practical impossibility of significant public engagement with all the esortric details of science is not a problem, but a resource to e nurtured and used. 