Workers at Risk; Voices form the Workplace
Dorothy Nelkin and Michael S Brown

xiv
People end to underestimate the of familiar risks such as driving a car, and dismiss the hazards involved in voluntary activities such as sports. The find it most difficult to deal with risk that are involuntary, unfamiliar, ill-defined and potentiallycatastrophic. 

Risk is a social concept and that perceptions depend as much on the social context as on the nature of the hazards themselves. 

xvi
reported a remarkable increase in worker sensitivity to a range of work-related hazards. Between 1969 and 1977 those who said they were exposed to one or more hazardso n the job increased from 38 % to 78%. In particular workers were increasingly sensitive to health-type problems as contrasted to traumatic injuries. (USA national Quality of Employment survey)

p4 in large enterprises, the extent of exposure to toxic substances is related to social status. It is mainly production and maintenance workers who are subject to risks. 
the situation is often diferentfor the self employe. The owner of a small beauty shop toils alongs with other hairdressers; the artist working alone takes his or her own risks. 

p5 “an engineer told me that at one of the other plants that uses the same stuff - a dog fell into the pond. The fished the dog out and he went over and laid down. Te next morning the came back and he still laid there - dead. It killed him.”

p6 “One day I went into a lab and saw a sign on the hood saying SUPER TOXICS. We had come in to change the filter and they never let us know. The first time a bag broke in that one building I went up and got real dizzy. I didn’t have a mask on. They never told me I should wear a respirator before going on that job. It really ticked me off. “

p8 “The sprayed the interlockings and the switch mechanisms so we had to go and wipe them off. It was all white. When we got there it looked like a white rain hit it and we had to wipe all of them down with a rag and water... They told us its just a defoliant like you use at home. You get told all your life that everything is always safe and its checked by the government and thats who you bleive.”

p10 “fill the tanks with cubes from Agfa, the company that suplies our chemicals. ... recirculator which means it’’ll take certain chemicals in thse cubes down below and recirculate the whole cube, which is great. The thing is its a little bit dirtier sstem for procesing film because you’re using the same chemicals over and over. The other kind is a replenisher. Now this takes chemicals and keeping inducting them nto these trays up on top where the film goes through. So ou always have live chemicals all over the place, a constant supply of fresh chemicals always getting in the air. .. At one time we had to mix our own fix. We had to take the raw chemicals themselves, fill the tank with a certain amt of water and mix in the chemical powders .You put your hand in and jiggle it around some and you hand starts to turn yellow, really yellow. Your nailes turn yellow your hands turn yellow.” [Why didn’t they use gloves or a stirrer?]

p15” The chemicals that they used to use for spotting were stright chemicals, like alcohol and ammonia. Now chemical supply companies make special formulas: they put them in bottles marked for paint or for ink or for blood or for various things. If you have an inkspot you put the ink remover on it. You don’t have to be a chemist... its simple compared to what it used to be. Up to that time, the man who took the spots out was in sort of an artistic class. He was alone and he did mystic things in the corner. The first man I saw like that wouldn’t let you near him. He was like a magician. He didn’t want you to know his tricks. Each one had his own private formula for getting spots out. ... White flannel pants. He showed us how to bleach them. HE took potassium permanganate and made a purple coloured solution and dumped these pants in and they’d come out just purple. You’d swear they were ruined. Then you put them in a slution of sodium bisulfite and they would come out as beautiful white flannel pants. This was wonderful except they wore the pants out.”

p23 
Lewis Carroll acknowledged the cerebral effects of mercury poisoning in the character of the Mad Hatter. 

p30 [sensitised to PGCH -asthma] Now, if my wife does windows with ammonia, i can’t stay in the house. It wipes me out with a headache and sinus attack. I know that household ammonia is a very caustic agent, but I don’t htnk I should eact like that. The doctor said I’ll always be more sensitive now to a lot of things.]

p33 effects of dioxin and its use in week killers on the railroad. We read the article and then that night we went back and read the crew books. Don  has all this documentation becuase he had to write down where he worked every day. The dates coincide perfectly. Horrifyingly perfectly. [childhood cancer, soft cell carcinoma]
p34 children with deformities - father exposed to something. Agent Orange. 
p36roughly a third of the newborns had some kind of birth defect, most of them being some kind of foot or leg deformity  [agent orange]

p37 “‘Chemophobia’ is  a perjorative term often used to descirbe the growing public concern about toxic chemicals in the environmnt and the workplace. A ‘phobia’ is an irrationald and illogical fear, It is to be distinguished from anxiey which has an explicable and rational base. Anxiety stems from an anticipation of problems especially thotse which cannot be avoided or controlled. It is a serious and pervasive problem for the people we interviewd.... Far from a phobia or irrational fear, thier anxieties about workign in a hazarous enviroment relect their limited ability to conrol the conditions of their wor or to find alternative jobs.”

obnoxious odours are now regarded harmful fumes. 

p40 “I’ve been a welder here for 25 years, loook at me, I’m fine.”But now I’m afraid of fumes. Everywhere you go there’s fumes.... There’s always some kind of stench in the air and you’re never quite sure what it is or what the concentration is or what its doing to you.”

p41 “They used to warn us that it was bed, yet we never took any precautions. It didn’t have a bad smell and you tend to think that if it doesn’t smell bad it doesn’t hurt you. 

p42 - unknown health effects, compunded by inadequate information and confusion. Conflicting information, unsure of whom to trus. Smells are not an adequate guide to identifying dangers. 

p43 “I read something in American Artist magazine about a group of art material manufacturers that had a voluntary program to label things. I would sooner buy a product that has good labeling than something that doesn’t. I’m pretty careful with paints. ... Is it better to use solvents on our hands and deal with that risk to get a little paint off or is the solvent doing more damage than the paint?’


p43 “I used to be more nervous when I didn’t understand much about carcinogens.... I understand risks now and probably would still be careful, just because I’m a carefullish person. But I was much more afraid of it then than I would be now because I know what it means. I understand the nature of risk and know that every cigarette I have totally outweighs whatever I could get making up a few microgram of this thing that says “Shown to cause cancer in animals.”Isn’t that awful? Knowledge breeds contempt.”

p45 “some things at the orchard I refuse to do, like going up in a tree with a chain saw. Its too easy to take off a leg or an arm. Working with pesticides is different. Its a danger you don’t really see, a danger that doesn’t happen right there and then. Its muh easer to ignore, less threatening, less scary. As much as I tr to be aware of the long term dangers of using chemicals they somehow don’t seem as imminent as cutting off a leg.”

p46 “men aren’t going to say  that they’re impotent, or that they’re sterile ... or that they can’t have another baby. The girlds are more open wiht each other. The’ll say “Gee I got my period twice this month” or “I didn’t get it” and this and that. They’ll tell you if they had a misarriage or something while guus are much more protective of themselves. Tehy thnk it takes aaway from them as men.”

p49 “It’s scary to think that I could have brough tthe stuff home on my pants or shoes or clothes, and maybe I threw them in a pile in the corner and my duagher crawled over them. Or maybe I  picked her up and it was on my coat. Something like that could have possily caused her caner. I don’t know if ts a guilt feeling on my part itsjsust a mixed emotion type feeling. Its hard to explain. I hope that wasn’t the reason.”

Much talk of the responsibility of bosses or organisations to ensure adquate ventilation - how would this pan out in a domestic environment? 

p72-73 Earl landscape supervisor botanical garden. 
“The awareness of risks does make us more careful. I’m sure that we are more careful than Harry Homeowner who , maybe twice a year, buys a couple of jars of “Spray This” or “Spray That” wed killer. He probably inhales more chemicals in his home than me or my gardeners because we’re all dressed up like spacement to protect ourselves. I see y neighbours in their yards jsut spraying like crazy right in their own drift. The’ve gotto be inhaling some of the fumes and mist. If I spray my own garden, I protect myself completely. So perhaps bein a worker in the field really makes you more aware of the hazrds.”

p73 “They’ve done it so long and so repetitiously that they have either forgotten or they have gotten into a pattern where they haven’t got hurt before so they do it the same way over and over.”

p90 what is the alternative?
trapped in job coz of education/ need money/  job scarcity

unions, strikes
inappropriate or ineffective advice from officail bodies - take it too far ie lodge grievance rather than provide info
p
p156 “Somebody should take the data sheets that the manufactuers put out and explain them. The chemicals come into the plant with the original labels, mostly trade names. Unless you were a chemist or looked it up, you probalby wouldnt know what it was. Most people don’t know what they thell you’re talking about with all these chemical terms. The bottome line is “Do not inhale the Vapors” so tehey will tuern their head while they’re sucking it in.

“The chemical saftey data sheets are very vague and any employee who’s going to assume his rights under the Right to Know law needs professional assistance. A competent chemist or environmental hygeinist should sit down with him and explain the terms. I have a college education and I needed help understanding and identifying these things. Either it has to be put in language that people can understand or there has to be more professsional assistance”

conflicts among experts, contradictory information, presentation of information “not books that you can pick up and read cover to cover. It would be like reading the dictionary” 

mechanisation, deskilling, loss of job, more chemicals, faster processes - the usual
