Drugs

DIFFERENT FORMS OF HEROIN AND THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO COOK-UP TECHNIQUES: DATA ON, AND EXPLANATION OF, USE OF LEMON JUICE AND OTHER ACIDS
2001, Substance Use and Misuse, Vol. 36, No. 5 , Pages 573-588
Recent reports of the use of lemon juice in the preparation of heroin for injection have failed to recognize the importance of the different forms of heroin (in the form of the salt or the base) and the impact of this on the chemical manipulation required before injection. One hundred and four opiate addicts in London were **interviewed** about the forms of heroin (white, brown, etc) and their relationship to cook-up techniques (use of heat and acid). White heroin was typically prepared with water and heat; **brown heroin was prepared with acid (citric acid or Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) or lemon juice) and heat**; pharmaceutical heroin was prepared with water only (i.e. neither acid nor heat). On the last occasion of heroin use, brown heroin had been the form most commonly used, with **over 90% of the sample using citric acid or vitamin C. Lemon juice was rarely used**, and heat was almost universally applied in conjunction with lemon juice.




Laboratory study of the effects of citric and ascorbic acids on injections prepared with brown heroin 
J Scott, A Winfield, E Kennedy, C Bond
International Journal of Drug Policy
Volume 11, Issue 6, 1 December 2000, Pages 417–422

The addition of acidic substances to brown street heroin to facilitate the solubility of diamorphine in the injection preparation process is commonplace amongst UK injectors. Knowledge of the chemistry behind this process supports the need for this stage in the injection preparation process. **It is currently illegal, under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, section 9A, to supply acidifiers and other paraphernalia to injectors in the UK.** In the current climate of evidence-based practice, any consideration given to changing the law would look for evidence to illustrate that the paraphernalia was necessary. Although the theory behind the use of acidifiers suggests they are essential, no previous work using street heroin has actually been reported to illustrate this fact. Anecdotal information has found that drug users are being told by some service providers that the addition of acids is unnecessary. It is important that drugs services give credible information to their clients. The provision of inaccurate information in one area may lead to a lack of trust of all information provided. The small study reported here investigated, under controlled laboratory conditions, the effects of citric and ascorbic acids (vitamin C) on injections prepared with brown heroin, in order to demonstrate the need for acidifiers in the injection preparation process.


search for “bicarbonate of soda” in Substance Use and Misuse 
led to 
Pseudoheroinism
1973, Vol. 8, No. 2 , Pages 231-242
BJ Primm and PE Bath
The role and significance of non-heroin substances in the pathophysiology of typical heroin addiction syndromes are discussed.


However, supplying citric acid to IDUs remains, in principle a t least, illegal by virtue of Se ction 9A o f the Misuse o f Drugs Act 1971. However, there have been re cent calls for a repeal of this law, and to date no one has ever been prosecuted for supplying citric (or ascorbic) acid. This is because prosecution for harm reduction initiatives would not be in the public interest. Despite this, some pharmacists’ concerns about the , albeit very low, risks o f prosecution had, until re cently, made them reluctant to supply it. This had made it very difficult for IDUs to obtain citric acid and had resulted in their use o f more dangerous acidifiers.

p12
Thirty-eight participants had used another acidifier as an alterna tive to their usual acidifier
within the previous three months. Most of these IDUs had used either a box or packe t of
citric acid bought from a shop or pharmacy (53%) or processed lemon juice (35%).
Finally, the participants were asked to list all the acidifiers they had ever used in their
inje cting careers. All o f the 340 participants who reported tha t they used an acidifier had
used the single use citric acid sache ts and the ma jority (87%) had also used a packe t or
box of citric acid. Two thirds o f the IDUs had tried processed lemon juice and nearly half
(44%) had used vinegar to dissolve their drugs a t some point in their inje cting career.
Male IDUs were significantly more likely to have used both processed lemon juice and
vinegar than female IDUs (x2
 = 5.0; df = 1; p<0.05; x2
 = 4.5; df = 1; p<0.05). IDUs who
reported inje cting more frequently were significantly more likely to have used vinegar as
an acidifier than IDUs who inje cted less frequently (x2
 = 35.0; df = 4; p<0.001). Fewer
participants had tried fresh lemon juice (20%) and ascorbic acid (15%). Interestingly,
significantly more IDUs from Lanarkshire than from Grea ter Glasgow had tried ascorbic
acid as an acidifier (x2
 = 9.6; df = 1; p<0.005). A number of participants had also tried
using “other” products to dissolve their drugs such as fre sh orange juice , diluting orange
juice, Irn Bru and Coca-Cola. One IDU admitted to having tried “just about anything with
citric on the label”

p13  Table 3.6
Acidifier      Most used acidifier           Other acidifier                 Acidifiers
                    in the last 3 mo                used in the last  3mo          ever used
                            (N=340)                          (N=38)                           (N=340)

Single Use          336 (99)                              4 (11)                         340 (100)
Citric Acid
Sachets

Citric Acid (packet, not    3 (1)                      20 (53)                       295 (87)
from the needle exchange)  

Ascorbic Acid (Vit C) 1 (<1)                          -                                   52 (15)

Processed Lemon Juice -                                13 (35)                        227 (67)
Fresh Lemon Juice        -                                  1 (3)                           73 (22)
Vinegar                         -                                  2 (5)                         150 (44)
Sterilising Crystals       -                                  -                                    4 (1)
Kettle Descaler            -                                   -                                 1 (<1)
Other                           -                                    2 (5)                            12 (4)

* Participants could cite more than one acidifier

p21
Indeed, this study has confirmed tha t **processed lemon juice and vinegar are the acidifiers most commonly associa ted with side effects such as blurred vision, severe headaches and sore eyes.** Using the single use citric acid sache ts, on the other hand, doe s not seem to
lead to IDUs suffering from such a fflictions. However, use of the sache ts can still lead to citric burns, and although their use does not increase the number of burns in comparison to other acidifiers, it is important to stress tha t as little as possible is used to minimise any risk .

http://www.drugmisuse.isdscotland.org/eiu/pdfs/citric_acid_full.pdf