the use of lemon juice and other acids has been widespread, cerainly in many Wester European countries including the UK since the late 1970s although the precise choice of acid and methods of use may vary. 
Historically it includes the longstanding practice of addition of quinine to black market heroin: variously been attributed to tan attempt to mislead purchasers into believing tha the bitter taste of the powder indicated a higher purity of the sample, or that quinine was a health orientated inclusion to reduce the likelihood of transmission of malaria from shared injecting as has occurred in outbreaks on several occaisions through the 20th C. (ref 56789) [ 1934, 1953, 1984, 1994]

heating partly H&S, though usually needed to incrase solubility. 

Since the 1970s European samples have often included substances such as barbiturate and methaqualone. Presumed practice initiated to stretch supplies, lab tests showed that these additiives increase effectiveness and uptake when heated on tin foil and inhaled. 

lemon juice or other acides relates to whether the heroin is in the form of the salt or in th ebase forms. 

brown heroin - base - highly suitable for inhaling fomr tin foil - oily consistency high yeild by sublimation, not so suitable for dissolving and preparing for injection 
hydrochloride salt - white - dissolved in small amt water by applying heat
none who had used pharmacuetical - dry amps - used acid 

White heroin — not actually need acid but out of 79 subjects, 28 (35.4%) had sometimes used an acid, with half having used lemon juice (15 out of 28).
Jif - 4 subjects
fresh lemon juice (nine subjects) or both (1) - - 

Brown
57.1% used citric, 35.7% used ascorbic, 3% lemon juice and 2% vinegar
of those who had used lemon juice
36% had used fresh, 22.1% used Juf and 25% used both, Two subjects could not remember. 

citric acid available in powder form from community pharmcaies, grocers for cooking and needle exhcnges.  55.8% used citric on their last occasion of injection and for 54.8 this was the acidic agent they normally used. 

vitamin C (Ascorbic acid)  - available from community phramaces and health shops in both tablet and powder forms.  Most of the remainder of the sample had used vitamin C. 

More than 90% had used either citric or ascorbic acid on their last ocasion of injection and more than 90% reported that tehy would use one of these two products in their normal prepof heroin for injection. 

Lemon juice and vinegar were rarely used.  - Lemon juice didn’t break down or dissolve. Bad for their eyes. that citric acid was cleaner, that it was not good for you, it burn, it ruins the rheroin, it oes not work and that it ave you a dirty hit, had bacteria concerns and two said it is easier to get vinegar out of the kitchen. 

Effiicent prepartion ofo base forms of heroin prio to inj requires addition of acid and conversion to the salt form to render them optimally suitable for inj. 
Use of lemon juice can thus be seen as a n adaptive method of convertion herioni into the most suitable form for injections. The inclusion of lemon juice or toerh acids in the prep of black market heronin for inj became widespread at the time as a sudden increase in the quntity of heroni in the base forms (ususally from SW asia) on the European illicit market. It remains unclear how the practice of additions of acides came to be incorporated in to the repertoire of heroin injetors, but this coudlb e established in furutre study of older ponpns. 

Heating reduces the likelihood of viral transmission but it also partically decontaminates stored batches of lemon juice in which funcal infection may have established itself. While ther emay be some small increase in convenience by methods which remove the necessity for applying heat, there would appear to be sustancially greater harms that would result from any possible move to no heat cook up. 

