EM Cammidge
Benzene and turpentine: the pre-history of dry cleaning
Ambix, Vol 38, Part 2 July 1991

p79
16 & 17 C
books of secrets - compilations of culinary and othe household  recipes, amusingg chemical tricks, useful advice on repairs

advice on removing grease spots - fullers earth or the use of paper and a hot iron. Absorption, rather than dissolution

oil and wax spots were a major hazard to fine clothing before gas lighting.
composition of candles remained unchanged over long periods. 1855 paraffin wax became available (Scottish shale oil trade was developed) 

stearine appeared as an alternative to tallow - displacing it eventually

improvements into wick construction made guttering and dripping less likely. 

p80
Turpentine part of the network of wood-based products
coniferous trees - Venice turpentine obtained from larch, a vigourous tree could produce 7 or 8 pounds a year for 40 years (harvest from living tree)
also distilled from appropriate wood (destructive - doesn't say whether it was only to get this one thing, or whether there were other products/ part of a process)
oil of turpentine, sometimes mixed with naphtha, was sold as an illuminated oil under the name camphene. 
p81
this was the form recommended for removing grease spots. Particularly good for paint, varnish or resin stains , and removing tar or axle grease. Satin goods, silk dresses and handkerchiefs, fancy waistcoats, lace and gimp were to be cleaned by immersion in camphene - half a gallon at a time. 1st and 2nd bath were presscribed = considerable quantity of flammable solvent in domestic use. Strong smell, tenacious.
dirtied camphene could be returned to the colour man from whom it was purchased and exchanged for noes or redistilled on the basis of one pint of new for two pints of old. 

Benzene - from coal tar
from pit coal - never took off
from gasification of coal - yes - large quantities from gasworks that were disposed of into a waterway or attempted to be burnt. 1815 Gas Light an Coke Company showed the tar might be boiled down to yield a volatile pile, possible substitute for tur[entine. 
Breaking down of tar into fractions  further investigated by John Bethel. It was to Bethell WJ Perkin turned to for benzene for new dyestuffs industry. 
Large scale fractionation only worked out 1847-48 CB Mansfield. He stated the qualities of benzene as a solvent. Clear hint. that it might serve to remove grease spots. Nothing known of toxiccity, though flamebilitiy was known. Domestic use of benene was recommended for the more delicate fabrics. 

Alternatives
ethanol - diluted form or wine (Earliest non-aqueous solvent)
p82
despite the solvent properties of ethanol widely appreciated in pharmaceutical uses, there was little consideration of detergent properties. Manual in 1909 recommended silk curtains could be cleaned in a liquid of soft soap dissolved in gin, treating mildew stains with soft soap followed by whisky (E and FM Spon, Workshop Recipts for Manufacterers and Scientific Amateurs 1909)

Naptha volatile flammable liquid distilled from petroleum. Further fractionated by distillation to yield benzine - boiling point 70-90 degrees C.  Benzine must not be confused with benzene from coal tar. 

Camphene benzene and benzine were the three main solvents used in removed grease spots, all highly flammable and dangerous when employed in open vessels. 

1840 Regnault announced formation of carbon tetrachloride (tetrachloromethane) by action of chlorine on chloroform in the presence of sunlight. Same year, Dumas prepared it from methane and chlorine. Neither widely available (anaesthetic properties of chloroform not yet realised) so no immediate hope for commercial solvent, despite its excellent characteristics. 

1843 Kolbe showed how to make octet from carbine disulphide, which was commercially produced. Non-flammable  gave it immediate advantage over the others. 

p83
corrosive action on metals - replaced by tetrachloroethane


 





