carbon tetrachloride

1909 - Harrods shampoo death and subsequent animal tests on a cat and rats to observe effects of fumes. 

Daily Express 1937 June 4  p14
Bits to cut out (hint sna tips)
Home cleaning
silk and wool materials when stained... if coloure dna delicate, best to use ctet. If uncoloured use hydrogen peroxide soluition. 

Daily Mirror May 11 1939 p34
Around the house by patricia beck
Grease spots on wallpaper usualy be removed with ctet, experiment first. 

Daily Mirror July 9 1940 p9
Around the house PAtricia Beck
houshold ammonia, soln of oxalic acid. crystals in water. 
Javelle water - washing soda, chloirde of lime. 
iron rust stains 
turpentine to remove paint. delicate materials respond better to ctet. 
ink spots, oxalic, then ammoia. 
grease stains on clothing household ammonia or ctet. 

Daily Mirror, April 29 1941
Around the House
wax on furniture I want to repolish with vinegar and water. If somethign stronger is needed, sixpennyworth of ctet oes teh trick. 

Daily Mirror, Jan 20 1942 p4
Wrong bottle caused death
Dying girl told sister she had taken a cleansing compound in mistake for cough medicine during the night. Stated at Chirk yesterday when verdict of death from ctet self administered was returned on Miss Mabel Turner, 19, native of Chirk. Chemist Norman Pendry 21 had been taking her out for several months, talking about getting married. Had not supplied her anyhing except castor oil. Chester pathologist said there was no evidence of pregnancy and no unnatural interference. 

Daily Mirror 21 Feb 1942
Live Letters from Handly Ann, Yiewsley in Middlsex. 
Remove lipstick mark off a white satin dress? Use Ctet but do the job outside or you’ll ge a hell of a headache from the fumes. 

Daily Mirror Nov 30 1942 p7
It’s Sense 0 its Clothes Care - Out with that spot by Kathleen Pearcey and Silvaine. 
home dry cleaning cupboard: absorbant eg French chalk, a solvent eg ctet, a bleach or several of them, such as hydrogen peroxide, or potassium permanganate, blotting paper, absorbanet cloth of the mutton cloh vareity, household ammonia, any good made-up spot remover of proved worth. 


Daily Express June 21 1950
Blast puzzled experts until world hunt brough a clue
experiment with two subtances, each harmless, produced an exploseion of dynamite force which killed two men. Mr E McKinnon chemist in charge of a lab at aluminium works in Banbury - dept was experimenting with ctet - the liquid used in fire extinguishers - as a solvent in making aluminum paste. Normall white spirit, a very inflammable liquid was used. Before he launched the exp he checked in every available textbook to see whether there was evidence of chemical instability when the two substances were brought toeher. He found none. A Home Office senior chem inspector said that after world-wide search a pamphlet had been produced in America in 1945 which said that in certain conditons ctet and aluminum produced an explosion. There will be no next time. Notified all factories likely to deal with these two substance and makers of ctet are inserting a warning notice in their handbooks. 


Daily express - Nov 9 1957 p7
Mercy plane flies poisoned man. 
Flown from Berlin to Hammersmith hospital - the only hosp in Europe wiht the apparatus needed to treat him. 

Daily Epxress May 15 1958
Deadly duster kills a girl - 
13yo Victoria Boden - liked to smell cleaning fluid on a duster. Common cleaning agent also  used in fire extinguishers. Derbyshire. Father ahd used the liquid for cleaning for several years. Victoria often smelled it. She liked the smell. He had warned her not to smell the fuild, althugh he did not realise it was so lethal. He found her curled up on her bed, holding yellow duster against her mouth. He smelled the liquid. 
powerful anaesthetic action. Misadventure. 

Daily Mirror Nov 18 1960  p6
I let the gas man dope me
George Fallows
Mrs X regularly let a gas meter man put her to sleep with an anaesthetic in his car. Meter man Leonard Pike accused of killing another woman (Sylvia Cobbett) with anaethstic. Mrs X said she associated with Pike for a year, once a week Pike gave her anaesthetic on a swab  and placed it over nose and mouth. I went unconcsious every time. When asked why did did this Pike alsws laughed and refused to explain. 
QC asdked “Was the use of the susbtance in connection with love making?”
Mrs X- I don’t know. Had made love with Pike long before he sed the anaesthetic. Did not know what Pike did while she was unconcious. 
QC - Did you like it?
Mrs X - I didn’t dislike it. 
Anaesthetic said to have killed Mrs Cobbet was carbon tetrachloride, a cleaning fluid. 
Mrs C’s naked body was found on a divan at her home in Woking. Pathologist said she died from shock which could follow the inhaling of a vapour such as ctet. Pike was alleged to have told the police he met Mrs C when emptiying meter. Associating about a year. Visted every week while husband was at work. Before Pike and Mrs C made love, the wife usually sniffed cleaning fluid. Pikes counsel, Mr Lawton told the jury that this had the effect as a couple of gins. 
The statement went on to tell how on the day Mrs C died she was lying naked on a divan wiht the cleaning fluid rag over her face. After a while the statement added Pike realised something was wrong with Mrs C, He tried to revive her then he sent for help. 

Daily Mirror - Nov 19 1960 p 16
Emotion could cause the sort of shock that killed Mrs C. Mrs C was pregnant - may have been in a highly emotional state. Pike might have been reckles sin the first place. But he had months or years of experience with ladies willing to indulge in astonishing sexual behaviour. Pike released on bail after jury failed to agree. Second trial to be at Lewis. 

Daily Express Dec 22 1960 p1
Gas fumes put 71 in hosp - Leeds engineering works - used a fire extinguiser when a pan caught fire. Gae of phosgene when poured on to the hot metal. 

Daily Miror Dec 7 1965 p3
firemen give a killer gas warning - 
1 000 000 fire extingushers in use all over Briain can kill when used in confined spaces. The produce deadly First World War killer gas phosgene. 
Mr Hudson had emptied 4 canisters of ctet on a fire in an enclosed part of a steel strip mill only 10ft sq - fumes enough to kill a regiment. There are thousands of these extinguishers in Sheffield and ther must be a million scattered up and down the country. Warned people to follow the isntructions written in small print on the extingushers. Generally speaking a confined space would be a cellar or an average size living room 

Daily Mirror Feb 21 1969 p5
Poison fumes warning over cleaning wigs
could cause poisoning. One death and several cases of narcosis have been reported after the use of hair shampoos containing the chemical. Dr Ronald Weir BMJ. a nurse ended up in hosp 3wks - kidnesy, liver were affected by the fumes. 

same page
Kevin Hunt
recipe book on sale at student bookshop -LSD, DMT, mescalin and psylocin. Philip Grey shop manager personally tore up every copy in stock. 21p handbook went on sale 10 days ago, price 5s a copy. Did not seem ot have a title but letter LSD and chem formulae decorated the font cover. Accepted a batch of these bookes in good faith. no one just cglancing at them would hink thaey were anythign other than genuine cheistry publications I’m shocked to think that they might be of use to someone wantint to mfc drugs. ... Bookles seemed to around a fiar amount of interest but I wasn’t intending to buy any more. Cambrige Uni sci said the recipes could only be follewed in a well equiped lab. Too difficult except for an experience research worker he said. Publishers The Buzz commnication Company 1969 - no address. 

Daily Mirror Oct 24 1979 p16-17
Alastair McQueen
Terror of the Teeny Glue Gangs
More youngster hooked on dagnerous practice. Desperate search for new kicks they inhale the fumes of model makers gle, gas lighter fuel, clenaing gluid and aerosol sprays. Contain acetone, butane ctert and other toxic agnets. Teh fumes are deadly killers. Those kids who are saved often remain mentally defective. Spotlight one area hit by the menace. this is our report. 
The Glueys
MArket Estate nr KX in pathetic little roups
crazed on the deadly fumes, waiting to rob anybody who comes near and attack anyoybody who resists. 
brought terror to the estate. 
steal from counters of shops, sell loot to other children to get money for more glue or butane gas or cleaning fluid to sniff. 
Interviewed nmother of glue sniffer - had child put in a home to get him away from estate crowd. First night he was in here a gang went to the home and started shouting for him. Told that if he didn’t get of they would do him over. Keep him in at night as much as I can . Told me he doesn’t sniff any more and I’m hoping its true. 
(It wasnt’)
lunged across the romm and tried to dive through the window to juin friends. Their hom eis on the 4th floor of the block. But to the boy in his crazed condition, it didn’t matter. 
“We would like to see the police given powers to stop shpkeepers sellign glue gas and aerosols to youngsters”

Path of destruction - jsut part of the trail of death an dmisery left by the glue sniffinc crazed - ctet not mentioned again
lighter fuel death - Liverpool 13 yo
Liverpool 14 yo death gas
Manchester a ministers son dead in the bath after sniffing [substance not identified]
mni junkies railway tunnel then danced on the busy tracks
kidnapped youngesters and forced them to sniff until lost consciousness or become violently sick. 
Police are powerless to stop this national scandal which is increasing daily. No law exists to give police the power they need to stamp out sniffing. 

Guess tis must be before there were any restrictions on sale of solvents to under 16sTth

Very few articles turned up for the search carbon tetrachloride

but 307 for Thawpit or Dabitoff - Mon 26 Mar 1928 onwards. 
adverts, shares for sale

Thawpit - for cleaning carpets
suits, hats and frocks, where there are greas spots use hawpit.  keep a bottle in the house. 

thawypit suits, hats and frocks, stocing s and shoes
/absolutely non-inflammabel, does not leave a smell. Ask your chemist for Tahwpit and be ready for future greasepots

Chemists are sellign a grease remover that acts lieka fairy magic. ... 

Adverts show both men and women with dirty clothes, and doing the stain removing


Thawpit’s x marks the spot where romance died

Dabitoff unmarks the spot  - exclusive fitted pad in neck of bottle makes DABitoff the complete home dry cleaning outfit always ready for use. 
Chemo Plastic Ltd. (1947 - Daily Mirror p4 30 Setp)

1946 - fitted cleaning pad - no cloths or burshes neede to clean clothes this easy way DABitoff. 
thursday 29 Aug 1946 Daily mirror p3
Lord Kilmaine 
in the habit of picking up any bottled he saw lying about and taking a sip - bottle of disinfectant on a talbe in the hall, label turned to the wall, friedns belief lord kilmaine drank from it by mistake. 
found ocollapsed ina achair, died in hosp. 

are xmarked the spot all men looking at women?
look at your lapels (woman w dirty lapels) by anothe rman?  no, look at your waistcoat! woman looking at man
dora, susan, muriel - no male equiv?

male child - tries to take spots off dog
male adult 0 can’t take spots off a spotted dick (pudding)
out damned spot - lady macbeth - proven dry cleaner for castle, house or cottage use. 
can’t shif a leapoards spots (no humans illstated) 
oil and tar marks - woman on beach

Daily express July 31 1959 p6
Woolworth - full page, various porducts
photo of hand holding bottle of dabitoff 
The 3 solvent dry cleaner with the magic pad Packa bottle with your holiday clothes


Daily Mirror April 4 1962 p23
Derek Dale  Stocks and shares 
AN ARTICLE!
Bonanza in the basket - You’ll find them in every househwifes shopping basket, Tahwpit, Atora Beef Suet and Lin-Dan tinned foods. Last yr these products record proift of nearly 400 000 for the Hugon company. ts shares are my star choice for this week. The housewife trusts Hugons products. She an also trust her savings in their shares. 

Daily Express Oxt 21 1963 p17
Cerebos bids for Hugon
Cerebos - the Saxa and Sifta [also Stag and Bisto] salt firm run by Brigadier MdRobers goes a take over offer for Hugon the Atora suet to Thawpit group. goign to accept the bid and recomminding shareholders do the same. 

New improved thawpit now contains extra safe ICI Genklene - look for this new shape bottle with handy cleaning pad. Also available without  pad.

Ranks say ‘Ah’ with £55 m bid to Bistof firm. 
Rank Hovix McDougall made offer for Cerebos - recnetly spred into many other products inc Tahwpit the stain remover [despite at this time it had been advertising the Fling car shampoo and wax more often than the stain remover until v recently - new improved version recently]

Dail Express Oct 28 1972 p17
Central and Sheerwood trust -  investment group
cash offer for Newton Chambers - engineering adn household products group
profit making household producs inc Izal disinfectants, Ronuk polishes and the Thawpit rande. 
Likely buyers mentioned was LRC International which owns Sanital and Eucryl




