Andrea Tone’s “Age of Anxiety: a history of America’s Turbulent Affair with Tranquilizers”

This book covers a lot of the issues I think are relevant and want to deal with in my work. This includes the notion of convenience and time (lacking the time to see a psychiatrist, the speed and ease of taking a pill), optimism in science and chemistry for producing a solution (in this case, the development of vaccines, cures and treatments), informed consent (lack of accurate information about side effects and long term consequences, and in one case being decieved about the nature of the pill) which is also linked with activism through women’s health movements. 

I thought the progression of the book felt logical. The incorporation of user stories through letters to the FDA, agony aunts as well as published biographical stories or high profile users was seamlessly done, and throughout the book rather than segregated into one section which I liked. If it had all been together, it might have been too samey and easy to skip. There was a good balance between functional users and those who had become unhappily addicted. 

I would have liked to have understood in greated detail more about the change from openess about taking anti-anxiety drugs from the users themselves, rather than just through looking at the growth in DSM classifications. Maybe this was just to to do with the sources available. Also, I think some investigation of interperson distribution and discussion of what happens with the drugs people are prescribed - one person is mentioned as having made a 10pill prescription last all year, I think more insight into practices would have been interesting and valuable to illuminate the user experience of taking tranquilisers. Also the cocktails seemed intriguing - did the pills dissolve or where they there to be swallowed? The bitter aftertaste is mentioned but only quite late on, so it seems like on of those things that wasn’t really looked at as a problem, until there was a better alternative. 

I thought the section on taking drugs as a political stance could have been better developed, though maybe its just my misunderstanding of the situation. I don’t think taking of any kind of drugs for the majority is a political act, though it is politicised through the regulation of prescription or prohibition, whether this is “postcode lottery” for access to treatments, clinical trials or criminilisation of substances.

The discussion of adverts was kept succinct although I felt there could have been more. I think I’d have liked to have seen side by side the differences between DTC and those ads placed in professional journals.

Doctors and psychiatrists seemed well heard from, but were there any accounts from detailers or salesmen? I’m assuming they tested, like the physicians did. What was their interface with non-physicians? They’d have  had specialist knowledge and access to pharms that could have reached their social acquiantances? I guess they didn’t have any qualms about selling to physicians because these are the people that would know the pateint or should at least be able to ask about contraindications. 

Re doctors, would any of them known or suspected that they had a rep for prescribing? Or whether people went to them after being refused? What practices or networks developed to catch this kind of patient behaviour? 



  