Reactive Writing
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gyanaecologists have issued a report about exposure to everyday household chemicals during pregnancy, which has immediately been jumped on as alarmist, unhelpful and unrealistic. I decided to read the new guidelines, available on the website, and to listen to the short radio interviews available on the BBC website. 
 
Who were these authors writing for? 
Health care providers and also interested pregant women, though it is not directed at them (it does not address the reader as “you might like to” but “the mother” or “the pregnant woman”.

What is the purpose of the document? 
Found in the guidelines section of the website, it is listed as a Scientific Impact Study, not guidelines (of which RCOG identify tree types: green-top, joint, and national evidence based) nor was it good practice or a safety alert. Its purpose is to highlight some of the difficulties that people have interpreting the information they are faced with, usually through mainstream media news stories, and product marketing. 

Concern about misleading product marketing is a strong thread throughout this document, a topic that Sense about Science, who are reported as having criticised this report, have published about too. 

I am surprised that the Sense about Science spokesperson thinks that help hasn’t been given. It is a publication about dealing with uncertainty and risk, not about giving “a simple answer”.  Where they investigated particular brands claiming to be chemical free or natural and found that they contained the very pthalates that people might be trying to avoid by choosing a product with that kind of claim, this highlights their concern for women who do want to take this step. 


It hasn’t named brands or specific products, because there is no defnitive evidence that the presence of chemicals will have an adverse effect, it has merely pointed out that labelling is misleading. The message about natural and chemical free is the same as SaS’s own information. They can’t give a simple answer because truthfully, its not a simple situation.  If they gave a simple answer of not to worry about it, which is the actual message that the expect the heath care professionals can to give to the majority of people, they would probably be accused of treating a complex issue flippantly. 

The report does not say that anyone has to, or must, or should reduce their exposure. It consistently leaves the choice to the individual, while expressing how low the risks are. There is no advice here that is not already given to pregnant women or that is common sense “only take analgesics or painkillers when necessary”, “avoid pesticides and fungicides”. It is not introducing new restrictive advice, even “avoid paint fumes” is not necessarily restrictive, people can still prepare nurseries but they should be sure to ventilate the room well, however, this isn’t a patient information leaflet so doesn’t go into that kind of detail. Being vague about cleaning producs and air fresheners and ubiquitous flame retardants is  

The report emphasises that although epidemiological research has associated environmental chemicals with an impressive list of adverse outcomes, causality cannot be inferred. 

It highlights the nonsensical claims of products that are marketed as chemical free, that “natuarl non toxic and green are all unregulated terms, which is forever welcome, as well as reminding people that natural does not mean not harmful. The thrust of the discussion about herbal or alternative products is on over the counter, unsupervised taking of supplements, vitamin A is named here. If this was a guidance document, it might go on to suggest the pregant woman consult a store pharmacist for further advice, or to assure that competant medical herbalists would not prescribe and supply medicines that are known to have negative effects in preganany. It is not a patient information leaflet, so it does not. 

Potential to...
In the section on phtalates and BPA, more detailed information could be given rather than refering simply to “certain” pthalates. Again, the levels of human exposure are too low to pose a real risk, but, that laboratory tests have so far only been done on single chemicals, not mixtures as would be found in the real world.  


The report references WHO studies on environmental endocrine disruptors, it discusses how difficult it is to assess whether bisphenol A, found in many ordinary everyday products, “has any effect at all”. Then it identifies media scare stories as adding to the anxiety. Ooooh, the media taking offence at a valid crititicism, unusual. 
 
 IT may be difficult for mothers to effectively deal with the uncertainty of chemical exposure risks...
 Now, I won’t pretend to having a majority view on preganancy and motherhood, and I am childfree by choice, but we can look at the language through out this document - how are the words pregnant woman and mother used, how are fetus and baby used? 
 
 DDT and PCB gets special mention as it is lipid soluble and therefore accumulates in fat, meaning that it accumulates in top predators. The inclusion is interesting. PCB and DDT are no longer used, sbut they might still be around in the environment to get taken up and included in .... everyday british food? Lets look into that. “It says that it is declining, fortunately. “ Which studies are they quoting? Is DDT and PCB still being found in new mother’s breast milk , in the Western world? 
 
 Food.gov has a section on dioxin and PCBs, which states that “PCBs are found at low levels in all foods, including foods that are important sources of nutrients. The Agency’s advice is that the benefits of a healthy, balanced diet, outweigh any risks from dioxins and PCBs.” It points out that the main sources of PCBs getting into foods is when animals and fish take up any soil or sediment that contains PCBs, and that the lipid solubility means that meat, fish, milk and eggs are where PCBs end up.
 http://www.food.gov.uk/multimedia/faq/dioxinspcbs/#.Ua8emWTF3XY
 
The persistence of DDT in the general environment means that DDT is still being detected seafoods especially, for instance mussels, oysters, sport fish and whale. 

Highlights current existing guidleines about oily fish are due to reducing heavy metals which are **known** to have developmental effects on fetus. 

Large section on use of pthalates but nothing on what they could potentially do, only that they can be detected in urine etc. “Certain” phtalates are linked to endocrine disruption and interences of masculinisation of male fetus. 

Chemicals in household products, doesnt say what they are, other than PBDEs (fire retardants) and PFCs (stain resistance, nonstick, water resistant)

Herbal or natural  - vague  Untested! So are many other drugs, but we know from use and caution that supervised use of herbal medicines by a competant practicioner  - they will not prescribe harmful things. Maybe this should focus on OTC and use the word supplement. 
gives vit A - retinol as example
 
 
The reaction to RCOG’s report is an example of how difficult it is to communicate scientific uncertainty, through the crude loudspeaker of mainstream media outlets. The article, though it could present some information better, makes a good effort to explain how uncertain the state of research is, espeically with respect to knowing whether detection of a chemical actually means an effect can be expected, and to the potential effects of chemical mixtures. 

In terms of my work, I’m interested partciularly in this statement from Tracey Brown: “We also get cynicism, where people think “well these scientists don’t know what they’re talking about” so when you do have a serious public health message to give it will be treated with that same cyncicism.” Here we return to the age old problem of communicating what happens in the practice of science to a generalised public and the alleged desire the public has for science to be neat, quick and definitive. It is rarely all of those things all at the same time. The point of science is that it deals with changing information. Increasingly amazing technologies are invented to detect chemicals at ever lower amounts, we can look at gene activity, modelling of predictions, but it is a peculiar kind of scientist who thinks that their results could never be usurped by some new piece of information further down the line. That kind of scientist who is completely certain about the definitiveness is not to be trusted. “We don’t know” is a pefectly trustworthy answer, even if its not one worried future parents want to hear.   

Although it is technically a sucessful outcome, is it desirable? What do you expect will happen afterwards? I have read many impatient, condescending, “of course chemicals are everywhere you silly people its obvious” attempts to communicate to a general public about the potential risks of chemicals experienced in everyday life, and I thought the report itself did well to avoid this, although when having to give real time responses in a radio interview, one of the authors did less well with this statement “If this makes people think ‘well I didn’t realise I was exposed to chemicals via these routes’ then I think maybe it is a step forward, its an educational step forward”. To me, this feels like a very “scientist” way of thinking about understanding and I think that Tracey Brown was right to question how well the impact had been thought through, though I would say “impact of putting this publically accessible on the internet” when the report is Not Guideline or Rules, and directed towards health care providers who can go into more detail with the individual about their own circumstances. 

She also referred to giving public health advice as “a serious business” which it certainly is, in both senses of the phrase - health advice is serious and there is an awful lot of money poured into the business of health advice.  Perhaps Sense about Science have made themselves available for future RCOG peer review activities. The accusations of making advice up on the fly are not really fair I think in this situation. If RCOG deemed it necessary to write a report, you can imagine there must have been a fair number of enquiries from their members on this subject and writing a report is an effective way to deal with them. There is no way, being specialists in obstetrics that they could be unaware of the extent of the information available to pregnant women trying to inform themselves, their members will have had women armed with folders of print outs or bookmarked webpages on tablets and mobiles, questioning from about all kinds of advice they’ve found. 

What I find interesting is the idea of media and the Internet somehow spontaneously generating advice. Content broadcast through media and shared through the Internet has been generated by people. Sometimes the message is mangled in an attempt to make it clearer or more relevant, or selected to serve a particular aim, or amplified to the point of dominance because it touches people as everyday household chemicals do. Yet “media” and “Internet” are often refered to simplistically as if there wasn’t some kind of feedback between audiences, generators of contentworthy comment (scientists, researchers, technologists, users, victims or the afflicted) and journalists. 


 