Thoughts on An Element of Controversey

If I had edited this book, I would have been harsher on phrases that seemed to have been copied without thought, on repetition and on contradictions. The chapter on bleaching textiles seemed to show the worst aspects of collaborative writing as the sections did not hang together well, and the repetition of concepts tedious. My distracting inner voice kept yelling “Get to the point!”. The chapter started off as if linen was the only textile to be bleached, although later on wool, silk and cotton were brought in. 

However, there was some really good material in the section on disinfectants. What I was happiest about finding in this chapter was branded cleaning products, branded disinfectants that both said what was in them (Burnett’s chloride of zinc) and also did not (Condy’s Patent Fluid or Natural Disinfectant - which was permanganate) from a pretty early period. Nobody was expecting householders to prepare caustic solutions from powders, these were solutions that were made up, convenient for use in the 1860s. The material that seems to come either from Worboys’ work or directly from the Wellcome Library (things like this I would have been harsher on) about “Government Pink Powder” and Calvert’s Carbolic Acid I would like to know more about - was the government powder actually endorsed by the govt? was it used institutionally only or in domestic situations? I will have to research these to find out. There is a really interesting mixture of complete honesty and obscuration. 

Users are touched upon in the chapter, through chlorine workers and accidental poisonings  - showing that households kept the cleaning fluid in situations where the bottle could be mistaekn for milk of magnesia or gin (two quite different things, especially as the fluid is definitely a white milky solution) and deliberate suicides which shows that it’s potency and potential for harm was known. However, other than the acceptance of germ theory in medical and institutionalise settings there is nothing presented that helps explain why members of the public accepted the use of bleaches, what was the flow of communication, what were the messages they recieved about what cleanliness is and how to achieve it. 

The quotes from Bronson about chlorine making people lazy (covering up the smell of putrefaction instead of removing the source) which was making people more susceptible to illness was fascinating, as were the calls to look at the evidence of safety from chlorine exposed workers as to its health benefits (not getting sick, ruddy complextions). The concerns about respiratroy problems are probably related to the variability in concentration, which is a definite usability problem which is not directly addressed in this article. The standardisation of products through mass manufacture to make them reliable is an important area to consider, as is how even if you have a standard product distributed through the UK, variables such as water hardness will lead to local preferences for certain prepartions and products.  

It was possibly outside the scope of the student’s exercise to write about the Rideal-Walker co-efficient as a measure of disinfecting efficacy, as alhtough it was definitely in use by 1930, I don’t know when it was invented and accepted as the standard test. [find out]

The chapter on the reception of Silent Spring contained a good quote from a letter to RC from a reader. It caused me to think about for all the good intentions and raised awareness, what did people actually do after reading the book? Did the bottles really go unopened? Has anyone looked for a demonstrable fall in sales of any DDT products or chemical aids in general? Has anyone spoken to retailers who would possibly have spoken to the newly environmentally concious consumers?  What alternatives were presented to people? Was there a resurgence in simple cleaners like vinegar and bicarb, which then caused these to be commercially packaged? I think it would have been hard for most people to act fully on the new information they had, especially as the channels for being exposed to information about alternatives might have been quite difficult to access, what authority would it have had and how easy would it be to obtain the alternatives suggested? People do get hung up on brand names, are unwilling to experiement becuase of the cost of materials, potential damage to their fixtures and fitting, or time needed to do it again more satisfactorily, and don’t like the smell of vinegar or ammonia. 

I took exception to the phrase that implied due to all the other environmental and health disasters, readers were ready to learn the facts presented by RC. What does learning the facts actually entail? Learning something doesn’t mean that you will enact it, you may consider then discount these facts in a day to day situation. I think that the work by Mark Wilson on activism and by Klaass will show maybe something more about what people actually did with the information they were faced with. 

Overall, there wwere a few good leads in this book. Even though it is well beyond the scope of my time period, finding out that the strength of branding, at least for houshold products, starts well before the time that I initially expected is valuable. It may well be different again in the gardening and photography spheres and it will be interesting to consider why this might be. Developing is definitely more niche, is probably only taken up by those who are interested willing to develop a mastery or comptetancy in technical things, whereas housework is a more universal task. Standardised solutions and sachets of preweighed chemicals opens up the area to people who are less willing to invest in this competancy, or when the process is genuinely more convoluted and involved, such as in colour processing. This will be where branding takes off again, and the one stop shop, e.g. Agfa and Kodak will be interesting to look at. 

Gardening again, there is a lot that can be done just with compost, and I should look into the Steiner work (again, see Klaas) because it seemed that this was a pretty novel idea or maybe he’d just articulated it more attractively. The issue of individual skill and mastery of an area, knowing the soil types, understanding the plants, has cropped up again and it isn’t something that everyone would have been doing - not everyone had space or time to grow anything. The need for standardisation when a lot of unskilled, unknowledgable people were perceived to need assistance and a boost to their pre-emptive occupational therapy was what brought about the development of the standardised fertilisers and composts. 
 

