Public understanding of science as in the guise described by the Bodmer report seems to be more about scientific literacy and the support of research. This relates to understanding what the scientific method is and to basic scientific facts about the physical world. The more modern papers tend to be concerned with biological sciences: genetics, stem cells, alzheimers, rather than to physical or chemical sciences. Has scientist become synonymous with geneticist now? I’m sure I sure a paper about the 40s being physics (bombs), 50s chemists (tranqs, antibiotics, plastics etc) and life sciences taking over in the 70s. I should try to find this again.  Chemistry and chemophobia have not been addressed, neither has applying any kind science to everyday life, it has been talked of entirely in terms of understanding formal, institutionalised and therefore distant or esoteric research. Relevancy has only been mentioned in terms of how a new technology, such as pre natal testing, might affect oneself. 

I ended up reading about public understanding of science having followed a trail about expertise. I was interested in reading about discussions of who experts were and think I got a little exhausted along the way. I was counting experts as experienced users (who would start as non users, becoming novice users and with prolonged experience they would become experts in their use of a chemical aid). I am not certain that this viewpoint fits with what I have been reading, because the C&E arguments seemed to include the need to then shape or contribute to developments in the field directly. This is possibly because Wynne, C&E generally framed their discussions in terms of climate change or radiactive sheep, and the ongoing discussions that uncertified experts could potentially contribute to. However, Jasonoff says that “expertise is not only in the heads and hands of skilled people”

What I did come away with was that people can educate themselves to a high standard about something, often this is the case when they become an activist about a cause. The general expert user does not feel the need to arm themselves with this sort of understanding, to learn the language of chemistry and ecology for instance. Activists are usually unhappy, active against something, whether it is ecological damage, capitalistic growth, or against the people who are against those things. From a users point of view, the language of chemistry remains limited, unless it becomes aparent that there is a certain chemical they feel that they should avoid = generally for some kind of health reason, such as allergy/ sensistivity, or for precaution if they become pregnant and want to avoid exposure. How would people even be exposed to the language of chemistry? Through the packaging, which might contain descriptions of action, as well as active ingredients, though interactions with organisations or individuals who have become experts probably through some kidn of negative experience that the user can relate or identify with. If there was a repeatable, suspected or proven link from some kind of chemical to some kind of visible/ noticible without equipment effect, such as killing pond life, or eutrophying rivers, then people might want to seek out and learn about the language of chemistry to describe it in terms that authorities will take seriously, less able to resist. This is what C&E described as translation, to be able to talk the same language. 

Chemical companies and marketing agencies should be working hard to get consumers to talk their language, to forge a new language with them or to speak the language of the consumer. People refering to slogans or brands in normal speech is talking their language, or forming a new one with them as the advertising taglines are appropriated and used in ways that had not been imagined by the company. 

Is being a housewife a narrow specialist, equivalent to a computer buff? Housewives are consulted as a group of experts on household matters, cleaning products etc, so yes. The same goes for gardeners, they can be treated as a group of specialsts. Are they consulted in the same way or are they treated mostly as recipients? I’d have thought that companies might at least pay lip service to consultation of gardeners, what you told us you wanted etc. as they wanted to create the idea that housewives / consumers were cared about (Sterling Homecare adverts 1975). I should look out for this type of information in any adverts I find. These users will know about their own local environment (whether their household is prone to certain stains, what weeds afflict their gardens).

Where people can see a noticeable effect, perhaps in their garden or to their own health, and attribute it to the use of a chemical product, they become part of a network of people who also see those similar effects  in their locales. How would they know? Whether this is bird deaths (Hansard and the Times), dermatitis, pet poisonings, garden sabotage (Daily Mail) they could write to a periodical and perhaps someone else would confirm that they were not alone. They could raise it in a meeting of likeminded people, whether a casual mention at the checkout of a garden shop, or a more organised meeting of housewives, there wwere ways of people becoming somehow linked in their concerns about products. 

The way that chemical products are discussed as being accepted definitely demands greateer investigation as I’m not actually sure that Ihave actually found anything that really does discuss it? New chemical products being brought onto the market hasn’t be unproblematic or unquestioningly accepted by consumers in an ages of scientific optimism and general adoration for the good work of clever chemists making the world better. Though when I think back to what I’ve read, problems seem to be of packaging (e.g. Harpic tube, cardboard splitting) rather than of chemical suspicon. Habits have had to be changed - e.g. hte why do you use what you use (soda, water) in the Harpic advert, but the answers were not framed in terms of chemical dislikes (beyond simple sensory perception of smells or stinging eyes) or even in institutional loyalty or boycott. Price, availability, other products or substances that were preferred or more effective, but not anything to do with an understanding of the action or chemical prodution methods. Perhaps later in the 1970s and 80s there become answers that relate to petrochemical industry and persistent environmental hazards, but this is not a concern in the earlier part of my studey. The 

