Writing my literature review has been hard because it covers a large area and feels fragmented. I should not worry about it currently feeling “bitty” because this can be edited and will probably be substantionally changed when I come to review it nearer the end of the project. Probably the best thing to do is to keep it in sections so that I can group them appropriately later and apply criticism to the readings as I currently understand them. 

At the moment, probably the strongest area is perhaps the gardening theme. The history of technology general area seems to be alright too, though I need to feel more comfortable using the language. Anthropology, geography, behavioural economics, marketing are other areas that I should be able to discuss. Methodologies will include things such as oral history, collecting information from newspapers and debates

I need to identify theories and be able to appropriately label or refer to my methodologies as strategic choices. I should also define some of the boundaries that I have placed, on timespan and disciplinary areas. 

Sections or themes that I’m looking at

Actor network theory? 
social construction of technology
public understanding of science using a deficit model / or possibly engagment with...in the case of activism. 
trust, tests
risk, health and safety, legislation
		This includes explosions, poisonings, avoidance of accidental poisonings, violent 			damage to persons or propert, 
convenience
mastery, expertise, skill
object reading - looking at packaging
		links to user experience, legislation, avoidance of poisonings or accidents, 						properties of contents (granular/ liquid, reactive)
housework, time, gender, unpaid or paid
		links to convenience, mastery, 
consumption decisions made on behalf of the household
leisure and necessity
neighbours or the context of an immediate social group or outgroup
concepts of home
concepts of chemical
ideas of clean, clean smells
reflection or shaping in shared experiences of content such as popular literature, tv episodes, education
