Audiences
Tim Boon - Helpful summaries on audiences include: 
Abercrombie, Nicholas & Longhurst, Brian (1998) Audiences: A Sociological Theory of Performance and Imagination, London, Sage; 
Nightingale, Virginia (1996) Studying Audiences: The Shock of the Real, London, Routledge. Several of these are discussed in the second part of this essay. 

Michel De Certeau - The Practice of Everyday Life - is concerned with what it is to be a consumer of cultural products. As he states, 
	‘once the images broadcast by television [for example] and the time spent in front of the TV set have been analyzed, it remains to be asked what the consumer makes of these images and during these hours’. This is a type of question that we have not yet encountered. He continues: ‘The thousands of people who buy a health magazine, the customers in a supermarket, the practitioners of urban space, the consumers of newspaper stories and legends – what do they make of what they “absorb,” receive, and pay for? What do they do with it?’ 
	'In reality … production is confronted by an entirely different kind of production, called ‘consumption’ and characterised by its ruses, its fragmentation ... its poaching, its clandestine nature, its tireless but quiet activity, in short by its quasi-invisibility, since it shows itself not in its own products ... but in an art of using those imposed on it.'
	, consumption is a creative act, and consumers ‘poach’ only what they require from the territory of health educators.
	Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, Berkeley, University of California Press 1984, 31. This is similar in effect to the approach associated with the television scholar James Halloran that ‘we should ask not what the media does to people, but what people do to the media’, in his The Effects of Television, London: Panther, 1970.

Lacey 1994
Moores 1988 
O'Sullivan 1991
van Zoonen and Wieten 1994

annette Kuhn for use of oral history and memories of film, impact etc.  - An Everyday Magic


Resources - 

Asa Briggs' history of the BBC

BBC Written Archives at Caversham - are they still here? will probably be near there next week... could I visit?

The Listener - was a bit baffled by the microfiche machine, if there was a way of searching this online to get to the more precise page... then I could use the paper version at Oxford. 

Radio Times - there will be listings, picks of the day/week etc... should have  thought of this before. Do I have access to this? 
	Should definitely find out about that country/science programme which used the word chemophobia. 

Hansard -  is ther eanything about the reporting of suicide/murder/explosions/solvent abuse and the media's responsibility for perhaps putting it into peoples's minds, or perpetuating it? 



