The listener p5-6
15 Oct 1987

David Taylor
Cooking the nuclear books
Cheaper energy from nuclear power was always a myth
DT reports on nuclear industry in the Brass Tacks programme Taming the Dragon Swords and Ploughshares broadcast on BBC2 on Thursday at 9.30 and the final film on the same theme next week. 

American fears of nuclear proliferation folowing Soviet and British Abomb tests. Sharing atomic secrets hoped to deflect attention from arms race. cold War rehtoric caught imagination of audienc - talk of swords to ploushares. End the threat to power supplies that had dogged Britains postwar economy. 
No relevant experience to draw upon, instruted engineerst ot styd price trends since Industrial Reovlution . highly speculative calculations  from stephensosn rockte to jet aicraft, but could not product the kind of costings to satisfy political masters. More expensives to build nuclear power stations because of the safety margins that had to be engineered into them. 
Govt used spectres of coal shotages to justirfy nuclear power. 
Magnox and AGR rection s- not built to time or cost, beset with tech problesm. 
Born of the Bomb, brought up by it. Selling idea ofcivil progrme to govt, if need arose indusrial power stn could be modiied for the mfc of military fissile material - ploughshares into swords. 



AD verts

Map of world - The countires ahead of Britiain in phamracueitcal research are shaded red [nowhere is shaded red]
one pound in every ten spent world wide on pharm research is psent int he UK by british based companies. Devotes more of its earning sot R&D than any other in this contry. Juding by our £850m trade surplus in medicines, this certainly helps to keep Britain in the punk
The British pharma cueical industry. Helpng to keep Brtian health. 
hexagon    abpi
association british pharm ind?  p7 The listener 22 Oct 1987

The listener 22 Oct 1987
p12-13
nuclear facts vs PR
second in David Taylor’s resport

warning about radiation from TV sets - 5 times the radiation dose rsulting from all the discharges from Britains nuclear plants. Statement prepared by National Nuclear Corporation\s Information SErvices Dept. In these days of marketed  propaganda we need to recognise that there are wo kinds of facts. There is the statmetnw ich is tru and there is the statement made in the hope taht it will be accepted as tru. The TV radioatn stat belongs in the latter category. 
Back in the Sixties some sets leaked a litter radioactiivty into the living room, but with better shieldin this porolem was eradicated long ago. Challenged to substantiate their  recent claim the NNC’s info services told us that tehy got this fact out of a nuclear newpaper. Had thought it odd and run informal test next to TV screen with a Geiger counter, but failed to get a reading. So we can all rest easy in the knowlee that TV sets and nuclear power stn have as nuch in common as a cow and the middle of next week. 
Yet in explaining reioactivity to a worried and bemused audience, the captains of Britains nuclear ind place great faith in comparative stats. It’s safer in radiation terms to seim in the sea off our SEllafield pipeline for 4 hours than it is to sit in a deckchair on a sunny day on a beach at NEwqay for one hour. 
The health haard form our nuclear stan has been este at something like smoking one cigareete in your lifetime. 
Troting out poulist ‘facts’ nuclear community hopes to recapture lost ground int he post Chernoby debae . 
Havin gconvused public information with public relations in putting accros a view of nuclear power the industry left people totally unprepared for the radioactive fallout fromteh Russian reacotr. Before this acciden, we had not undertood that nuclear plants often vent small amounts of something relatively harmless radioactity or that when somethign went wrong they could release quantities that could be dangerous. ... Now the lesson about the posible danger s of low level radiation havs been learned the hard way, public opnion has turned against those who failed to supply his info. 

Lord Marshall sayas ‘If the public distrust us, that must be our fault. It’s hard because lots of tru facts about nuclear power take time to put over. Some of them are complex and that is why we hve to learn specil skills to put things over in a simple way. 

env arguments for nuclear power not appeal to industrial sponsors the CEGB. Could produce figs for no who die from disease cause by coal polln or point to how CO2 released by coal burning is having a diasterou greenhouse effec on Britains’s climate. 
whole world is radioactive - twice as much radiation from natural bg sources than we are allowed to recieve as an annual dose from nuclear power stns - he is treading on difficult ground. Any talk of a topping up process is almoust bount to prompt the hought taht one millisievert of manmade radiation could be a unit too man and however irrational the fear it cannot be sicnetifclaly dispelled. 

As citizen sof the nuclear age we have lieved through a revolution in radiological protectio without even being aware of it. General Groves set an external radiaion does of 50 rads per week for any nearby community before ordering an evacuation. No one knew whether 50 rads was harmful or not but to the military mind, it was an acceptable risk. Today the internationally agreed level for public exposure to ionising radaiation is 26000 times lower and yet evern this cannot be said to be safe. 

.... impossible to establish cause of cancer. does not stop people form trying. Statisicians nd medial researchers are delving into old health records to establish a link beween blod cancer and artiifal radiation. Statitstal connection first made in Cumbria 4 yearsa ago. 
Ultimately the argument turns on how we calculate cancer risks. Imprescicse science radiologist rely heavily on the long term study of the survivors of the atomic explosionin in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Using this Japanese cancer data scientists have porduced an exposure risk estimate by exrapolating from high to low dose. Teh gorund is shifting.... leaving the statisicians to batttle away with their pocket calculators we looked for a different kind of truth, one based on common sens adn human experience. People who live near 3 Mile Island - stories of cancer and still births, despite no-one actually being hurt in the explosion. A Whitehaven inquest jury decided that a former sellafield employee who contracted leuikia had died of an industrial disease brougt on by radiation. Apparaently first time a verdict has been returned in a British coronors court. In the absence of clear scienfidic proof, people are beginning to draw their own conclusions. 

