household still the site of choices, shapes medical direction, agency not taken away by the growth of professional power
expections and opportunities provided in the technologies
what people could do for themselves, what they were being expected to do for themselves? 

didn’t notice they still had these things
behave / comply in 
people might not want to follow advice or it may be difficult to follow
drs know people don’t follow advice
technologies do in the household - medical reation to absorbtion

domesticating medicine
ideas and expectiaon about the home and the household, the infrastructure (doorways, plumbing)

bathroom scale
quantitative and self surveillance 
patchy, contested - home dialysis machines
ethnicity
beauty norms

quantitation - measurement established the idea of normal bodies and normal disease, normals of all kinds - things that anyone could measure
measurement enters medicine and enables us to understand highly subjective diagnoses - the exclusive right of practicioners at that point

establish a type, establish a norm - measure everything, natural sciences, reinforce medicine as scientific rather than humanistic
making up new practice is easy but have to convince others, train them etc
reproducible, understandable - SOPs, machines output numbers can refer to charts of expected norms

rise of scientific motherhood -  no longer rely on instints, advice from fellows, only the advice from scientists
Berry Bros and Wright wine merchants - kept book of measurements, weighed people on scales used for wine tuns, entertainment
had to go to drs office to use scale
public culture - weigh machines, plus other entertainments. Becomes attached to health. 
for scientific weight control, you had to have scales at home. 
idea sold to you - via practie of infant norms, correct development etc, can know someting of one’s own body, can know something ‘useful’ is more challenging. Availabilty of tables - norms for adults, harder to construct, healthy popn were unavailable for measreinemtn =  insurance industry bought into idea than measurement could predict health. US and UK used height weight ratios as signs of good health, is then taken up by public heatlh.

difficulty in using tech was problem and appeal - became expert
initial concerns - masculine concern. weomen were measured for clothes, but not for weight. busieness men = heavy enought to be healthy , not a burden. Very tied into business. part of hygienic citizen ship. 

not just tell you actual weight, health chart on cinema weighing machine has what you should weigh. 
in you survielling self, others can also see - responsibility beyond self, to family, to society
relates to 
santising home, killing germs, not just so it looks clean - related to what you can sell. Duty to achieve this. 

class - image of male child weighing self, image of possibly servant helping child, modern middle upper class - scales not cheap. Can buy anywhere - v convenient.
the thinking thousands - slogan associating self with others, hygenic citizenship

domestic architecture doe snot lend itself to private self surveillance, availabiility of separate private room in order to clutter up with equpt, public scale exists much longer in UK, though idea of hygenic citizen ship expands with welfare state. 

GHK - girls trained to weigh selves, using dollies
watch your weight, others do  !!!
small and compact scale, easy storage hang on a wall - not an issue in the USA

tool for creating normative bodies - one tool among many, created by needs by medicla professtiona nd new industry - life assurance. integrated rapidly into domestic home. Other techs could not follow this pathway, eg stethoscope -h ard to tell if its good or bad, no nmber, relies on training and experience, not like the scale

people were dialysing at home, having fought for the right to do so, early on. Very few hospital machines, rationed. High risk, complex, very large piece of equpment. Self service - all nurse has to do is minister to comfort, patient operates controls. It is homely, a domestic space. Contested, excoriagetd. should patients be allowed to do this at home? Question of elite profession and expertise.
1st ep of tomorrows world - home dialysis, compared to US where they choose and reject people for treatment, choose life and death for patients
Olga Hepple - dying, blind, kidney failure, heard about it, husband engineer felt he could make one himself, 1.4 price of hospital machine, she was a trained nurse, so could perform complex routines of cleaning and sterilising. Med prof did not encourage this, this was not expected. med systems did not provide what they wanted, so they went for it themselves. Normal home, haven’t had to change anything. Modern home, plumbing, able to keep dialysis room constant temp, artificial fire, normal bed, leading a normal life, independance. rebellion but in order to conform to norms and save life. Take power to be normal into own hands. 

independance from 

bringing medicine under control, bringing it into the home and domesticating it. 

Carers - relies on homestructures, not just a space that a patient inhabits, but a community, help disconnect and connect life in their hands. Language used about drs but is now used in reference to carers, non-professionalised, is it right for them to have this responsibility?

see particular types of homes in the images of medical technology

empowered patients or faciliated doctoring?




