**A review of the History of Advertising Trust Archive (Raveningham, Norfolk, United Kingdom) .**

Researcher*introduction
 Introduction"to"your"current"research
 Overview"of"why"this"archive,"library,"or"collection"is"important"to"your"current"
research
 General"dates/duration"of"your"archival"visit

I wanted to write this review because whenever I’ve mentioned to colleagues the History of Advertising Trust archives, they haven’t heard of it and they immediately think of it just holding finished product of adverts. It is much better than that. 

I first visited the archive in 2005 when I was looking for adverts for condoms in newspapers and magazine. It certainly delivered. In March 2013, I  spent a couple of days looking at books and marketing material for domestic chemical products, such as household cleaning supplies. As HAT holds archives relating to Reckitts, manufacturers of products such as Harpic, this is relevant to my research. 

When I planned my visit, I browsed the website and gained a rough idea of the collections that might be of use. The online search facility is likely to be available in late 2013. This is where the collections knowledge and expertise of the archivists came through who were able to suggest more material that might be of interest. I explained my topic and arranged everything I wanted to see before I went with the help of the archivists. Prearranging a visit is essential because the Research and Study Centre is small; when I visited I took up a couple of tables and a volunteer was industriously repacking material on the remaining tables. 

Visiting HAT is quite a different experience from visiting a city centre based archive, though the rural trip is a pleasant change for anyone permanently based in busy places.   HAT is situated at the Raveningham Centre, which is a cluster of craft and antique businesses in what could be described as one of the sweetest industrial estates in the country. There is a bus from Norwich that stops at the Raveningham Centre though  public transport does not serve this area especially well, so if you are not travelling under your own steam, a prebooked taxi is from Beccles train station probably the best way to get here for many researchers. There are small brown tourist signs to the Raveningham Centre. There are extensive details to help you get to the archive on the HAT website. HAT occupies the furthest building on the complex and there is plenty of parking for cars or bikes. I’m in the fortunate position that my family lives nearby, but there are B&Bs and holiday cottages in the surrounding villages and small towns. 

Upon arriving, researchers sign a visitor book. A simple paper form is completed so that the archive can collect information about you, your academic or company affiliation and your area of research. This is a single storey building, with an accessible toilet. The general atmostphere is quietly industrious, quite informal and welcoming to researchers. 

The archive has lockers for personal belongings, there are plenty of spare pencils provided in the search room should anyone discover that their usual stock of pencils is mysteriously absent from their bag. There are plugs and extension leads for plugging in laptops and there is Wi-Fi (password provided) is available if you would like to use it. Personal cameras or scanners are not allowed, although when you need to copy something there is a photocopier (colour and black and white) or a HAT camera if the item is not suitable for the photocopier. This is quite adequate for research purposes I have found, and the charge of 20p per A4 sheet (B&W) or  are reasonable. 

The Research and Study Centre is open plan, with the archivists desks at one end of the room, and space for researchers at four tables in the library. The archive gets enquiries through the day, so if you think you will feel distracted by the low level noise of a working office, take some headphones. When I was there an athlete wanted to find out who had directed an advert he’d appeared in, and a journalist was sourcing a video clip for their online content, so it was actually quite interesting to occasionally eavesdrop. 

At staff break times, I was offered a drink and it was pleasant to sit and chat with the archivists and volunteers in their small break room. If researchers want to bring a packed lunch, this is a good place to eat it, or there is a friendly cafe in another building in the Centre that serves light lunches and cakes.

So, why do I think that the archives held here are so special? As many of the deposits are made by advertising agencies, researchers have access to not just the final adverts and details of where and when they were published or broadcast but also files of correspondance and research associated with the advertising account. From these, researchers can access market research data, evidence of the state of the market, and even track how certain decisions have been made. It all depends on the agency’s filing system, so there might not always be what you need, but if you are looking for sources on 
 

 Hours"of"operation,"with"special"note"regarding"whether"“official”"
opening/lunch/break/closing"times"correspond"to"“actual”"working"hours,"
vacation/holiday"closures"etc.
 Any"advice"on"what"to"do"during"lunch"or"staff"breaks
 Website"address/URL
o Registration*procedures
 What"special"documents"are"required"for"foreign"researchers"(e.g.,"passport,"
introduction"letter,"formal"explanation"of"research"plan,"complete"list"of"desired"
materials,"etc.)
 How"far"in"advance"does"one"need"to"initiate"the"registration"procedures?"(i.e.,"
How"much"time"separates"the"start"of"the"registration"process"from"the"start"of"
requesting"and"viewing"documents?)
o State*of*indexes*and*catalogs
 How"does"one"look"up"materials?"(E.g.,"keyword"searches"on"titles/files,"paper"
indexes,"a"mixture"of"different"formats,"or"something"else?)
 Are"the"files"requested"via"paper"forms"or"via"computer?"(Note:"If"you"have"an"
extra"(blank)"request"form"that"could"provide"us,"either"digitally"or"in"physical"
form,"that"would"be"much"appreciated.)2
o State*of*digitization
 Among"the"sources"you"read,"were"any"digitized?"
 Were"any"of"your"desired"sources"unavailable"because"they"were/are"in"the"
process"of"being"digitized?"Did"you"hear"of"any"other"collections"within"the"
archive"that"were"unavailable"for"this"reason?
 How"do"digitized"sources"facilitate"and/or"hamper"the"research"process?"(E.g."
being"able"to"textFsearch,"but"blackFandFwhite"scans"of"color"originals?)

o Requesting*materials
 How"many"times"can"a"researcher"reasonably"expect"to"submit/receive"
requested"materials"in"one"day?"
 What"is"the"maximum"number"of"files one"is"allowed"to"request"at"one"time"(and"
how"flexible"are"the"archivists"on"this"point)?

o Duplication/reproductionguidelines
 What"kinds"of"duplication"are"permitted:"photocopying,"printFouts"of"digitized"
materials,"digital"pictures,"handFcopying,"nothing"at"all?
 How"much"does"duplication"cost"per"page,"in"each"of"these"formats?
 If"duplication"is"permitted,"are"there"limitations"in"terms"of"quantity?
 How"quickly"can"a"researcher"reasonably"expect"a"photocopy"request"to"be"
completed?
 When"duplicating"materials,"does"the"archive"also"mark"each"document"with"the"
full"file"number"(i.e.,"archival"code)"or"should"the"researcher"expect"to"do"that"
her/himself?

o Atmosphere/ambience
 Please"describe"the"overall"atmosphere"of"the"archive,"particularly"in"terms"of"
reading"room,"noise"levels,"friendliness"(or"otherwise)"of"the"staff
 General"rules,"regulations,"or"other"warnings"about"which"future"researchers"
should"be"aware."

o General*advice*and*guidance
 Overall,"what"advice"would"you"give"to"someone"interested"in"working"at"this"
archive?"Again,"please"feel"encouraged"to"draw"upon"personal"experience"and"
anecdotes."
FORMATTING