Natural Stain Removal  (2007 - just for comparison) 
deborah martin
Fair winds press
Beverly (USA)

p11 Any high school chemistry teacher will tell you that “like dissolves like” water solvent for water based stains, while oil based stains repond better to oily tmts followed by detergents to get rid of the oil residue. complex combintation sof chemicasl - dyes, inks, paints - require harsh chems or solvents to dissolve them. 

	This is interesting because I don’t think i’ve seen stains explained like this in the other household manuals or stain removal tips. It assumes that you have done high school chemistry, or that you are educated to a high school level (whatever that is). It doesn’t follow that a complex combination requires “harsh” chemicals, I might have said “a different approach, or more complex treatment”.
	

p12 take proper precautions to protect yourself while you work... disposing of soiled cleaning cloths in an environmentally responsible manner. 

	Even though it doesn’t say here what an environmentally responible manner is, this is never addressed in the era that I look at. 
	to protect yourself - the individual, not someone (in particular a child) that the person cares for as it so often is in the era I look at. 
	

p15 natural approach 
safegaurding your family’s health - - back to the family here, rather than self, or wider popn. 
Not all chemical cleaners are inherently bad or dangerous, nor are all natural cleaning materials safe and risk free. Harsh cleaning products come with such a long list of warning that it only makes sense to aoid exposure to them as much as possible. - - or, just follow the precautions? it is not the only option to avoid exposure. 
Chemical sensitivity - growing concern, medical necessity for some. 

p16  replace an arsenal of chemicals with knowledge, common sense and  basic cleaning products, inexpensive
		expertise replaces chemicals, interesting
more convenient to use common household products - not run to store for stain remoal product, or ponder differences between products
		this is a different kind of convenience - instead of the convenience provided by the readymade, packaged up chemicals, that you would presumably have in stock in your arsenal.
		
p17  protecting the environment, describes phosphate waterways issues
p18 as a group natural stain removal producs pose fewer hazrds to the env than the complex chem compounds making up commercial cleaning products. 
even common household products and naturual materials require careful handling to safeguard your health. 

p19 read the label, follow precautionss
well ventilated area,esp solvents (does not mention smoking) 
protect hands w rubber gloves

p20 lock clearly labelled chems away from children and pets
label homemade solutions and store securely
do not store in food or beverage containers
never mix household products wo specific knowledge of the results. dangerous reactions and by products
phone number for poison control centre.
		
p43 
alcohol  isopropyl -  this is never mentioned in the books or tips from the era I’m studying. 

p44  
gives chem name - ammoium hydroxide
ammonia at the heart of many cleaning products
best to use clear ammonia wo detergents added - interesting, is this why cloudy ammonia is cloudy? - yes, sudsing or nonsudsing
(comprehensive description of action and precautions) 

p45 baking soda, sodium bicarbonate description of action
bleach (sodium hypochlorite, aka liquid chlorine bleach)

p46 borax sodium tetraborate decahydrate, laundry booster
p47 club soda, slightly acidic, get the kind wo sweeteners
cream of tartar (bitartrate of potassium) - sold with spices at gorcery store
p49 hydrogen peroxide (3 percent type, used for first aid, not for bleaching hair) =  I think I’ve seen the higher percentages recommende din other publications? but can’t remember. 

p51 lemon juice (citric acid)
meat tenderiser - unseasoned - enxyme products mixed w wate
nail poilish remover - nonacetone type, amyl acetate
p52 salt (sodium chloride) 
p53 vingar (white distilled, aka acetic acid)
WD-40 [only branded product mentioned so far]

extra additions - 
citrus solvents (d-limonene) natural alternative to harsh petroleum based solvents [ah.... here we have the thing, she has mentioned petroleum products wherever they occur, is this concern about fossil fuels, limited resources, the env? ]
p54 [still d-lim] still volatile, use in ventilated areas, find at health food stores and natural product catalogs

p55 denatured alcohol - ethyl alcohol, denatured by acetone or methanol [this is meths]  highly toxic and flammable, powerful solvent sold in hardware stores. 

p57 enzyme cleaners - availble fro mhealth food stores. 

p58 washing soda (sodium carbonate) slightly caustic alkaline mined mineral used as laundry booster, sub for solvents  [does not say where to get]



p194 - interesting point on sugarfree gum introduction - the advice to freeze in order to facilitate removal is no longer relevant, sugar free gum remains pliable. 



