Your report should focus on self-assessment of the research you have accomplished, and might include topics such as libraries/archives/galleries visited, any written work done, contact with supervisors. You could also include your programme of related studies – seminars, lectures, conferences attended.  You may, if you wish, also comment on the School’s, and the University’s, provision for research students in terms of administration and accommodation.


Silent Spring Workshop
1March 2013
I attended the Silent Spring Workshop in York, it was an interdisciplinary meeting billed as a workshop. It was interesting, and I have signed up for a coursera “Fantasy and Science Fiction” as a result of wanting some guidance for following up some of the ideas. I had not known that ecocriticism was such a large and active area, as I had not foregrounded literary journals in my searches. The bulk of the work seems to focus on the authors of the work, rather than the readers, which as I am interested in users, is my focus., It encouraged me that my thoughts about the general mileaux of environmental issues coming through in popular culture was relevant. This is a strand I want to pursue and write about, because I think the 1980s spoof film the Incredible Shrinking Woman, is an insightful and fun comment on the domestic use of chemicals. The original Incredible Shrinking Man involves him being exposed to agricultural chemicals and nuclear fallout, so is appropriate for the era in which it was made. 

I have been surprised by how diffiuclt it is to find information on the consumption of popular culture. I have been unable to find information on book sales or library borrowing and though I haven’t tried it yet, if cinema figures aren’t forthcoming for any of the films I’ve identified as having central chemical themes then this will have become a completely dead end. I had not expected to have to approach this question in such an oblique way, although a direct and specific question in oral history interview could work well to fill this gap. I am treating fiction separately from nonfiction; news and documentary reporting. Though so far I have not really found the scholarship I was hoping for on the TV slots I was hoping for - Panorama, Horizon and even the Christmas Lectures. 

I need to find a good reference in addition to Dorothy Nelkin’s Selling science, as too many papers and books seem to treat media as something totally influential, rather than feeding from public feeling. The news would not put something forward they werne’t sure would be recieved by the audience. 

I spent two days at the History of Advertising Trust archives in Norfolk and I expect I will return. I was expecting to find copies of print adverts with details of where and when they were placed, but what was available (in addition to some of this) was indepth market research and correspondance about the product and users, including an interesting battle they had to find a very limescaley toilet (not obtainable, at least not in the shortish turnaround period). This, along with a company history available in their library, will be really useful for helping to pull together how the user was envisaged, and also details from interviewed anonymous users about what products they were using and why. Household ammonia and carbon tetrachloride were compared as stain removers, as were other branded versions of these. This idea of chemicals known by their true names or by their brand names is central to my thesis. With respect to toilet cleansers, there is interesting information about practices, packaging preferences and even an investigation into whether it was true that housewives would leave a tin of Harpic conspicuoulsy in the bathroom (even if it was empty or that they used other products to clean the toiletbowl) as a signifier of cleanliness.  

As very few people have heard of this archive, or think that it will just be artwork, I am drafting a “fresh from the archives” for Dissertation Reviews while bearing in mind my supervisor’s concerns about getting scooped. 

I have been using keyword searches in Hansard to find evidence of concern about household and garden chemicals. This has been useful particularly in respect to sodium chlorate, which is a chemical long known to be explosive, used as a weedkiller. It was pretty attractive to children making homemade bangers, so gets referred to periodically after injuries or fatalities occur, and was also implicated in terrorist activity. There is interesting debate about the form in which it is sold to users, either in liquid solution or with a fireretardant, with the counter argument being that determined people intent on using it explosively it will find a way round these measures. The other particularly useful publication that this search highlighted was the chemicals for gardeners leaflet, published in the midst of a spate of bird deaths following agricultural spraying but which advocated the domestic use of DDT, aldrin and deildrin without comment on negative effects. What was also interesting was that the MP who championed this issue, continued to appear in Hansard in connection with domestic chemicals and consumer information, including food and cosmetic additives, labelling and deceptive packaging. 

Examining magazines for adverts and articles at the British Library. I have had repeated failures to order the correct Good Housekeeping journals, so resorted to surveying housekeeping manuals at the Bodlian Library, in conjunction with looking for household tips in The Times and The Observer/Gaurdian (only because these are online and searchable, I do understand the limits of these middle/upper class publications). These seem to repeat the same information though with increasing emphasis on efficiency of labour. Only when the 1970s are reached do any branded goods get mentioned (Shirly Conran, who also states suppliers including Halfords, Selfidges and Habitat and  but even she continues to recommend homemade remedies and unnamed bleach). What has been noticable, has been the limited range of chemicals recommended, with stain removal being the principal point of specialism with carbon tetrachloride, ammonia, benzine being the most frequently mentioned. Spirts of salts, spirits of lemon, oxalic acid, are mentioned, though rarely with instructions on where to find them, how to store them or dispose of unneeded. Rationing and WWII shortages led to specific mentions not to use petrol to remove stains, and to make the most of clothes by being vigilant with stain removal. Infact, this was the thrust of an entire advertising campaign by Thawpit, which was a carbon tetrachloride stain remover, which they wanted people to use beyond just the spots for total clothes care (and therefore sell more - they felt spot cleaning had got engrained, people would by a small bottle, it handily didn’t evaporate and they didn’t need to buy very much). The books quite often have a table detailing action in case of poisoning, which highlights some trends, such as the appearance of barbituates and instructions like “no sleeping pills after cocktails”.  

Poisoning, accidental and delibrate, has been a strand of my research. However, the professional opionion expressed in BMJ etc has been that household chemical products have not been the main culprits but the growth of barbituates and othe hypnotics. There are the occasional ingestions of corrosive chemicals, either accidentally by children or deliberately by people who want to harm themselves. Rat poison and arsenic were quite frequently featured in poisoning stories reported by The Times, but I think that these areas are well covered scholastically, and as are for the express use of pest control rather than more diverse household uses I don’t think I will go any further into their use. Disinfectants and strong household ammonia were also used to ill effect, along with the occaisonal combination of chemicals resulting in poisonous or corrosive gases. Quite often these noxious fumes are taken as a sign of the cleaning mixture being strong and effective. In home photo processing manuals there are warnings to flush sinks well with water between disposing of spent solutions in order to avoid the creation of poison gas. 

Packaging and labelling has been used in an effort to create distinctive, functional and informative containers that are easily identified either on the shelf in the retail environment or in the domestic chemical arsenal under a sink somewhere. The storage of chemicals is recommended by household management manuals throughout time as to be somewhere locked and out of the way of children, though under the kitchen sink or on a garage/shed shelf is where they most often end up. Photographic chemical solutions were allegedly often kept in airing cupboards, though dark the warmth was unsuitable for storing these properly, with manuals specifically insisting that this was not best place for them. Original containers, or at least not reused beer or softdrink bottles, are always stressed, as is correct labelling if decanted. This suggests that they were decanted, but the reasons behind this practice are not elaborated on, whether getting a small amount from a neighbour or buying from a retailer. Cassie Watson’s work on hydrochloric acid explains that people bought small amounts in their own cups (not bottles), which facilitated throwing it at victims. She also points out that acid attacks grew increasingly rare, being very infrequent during the time that my study covers and that their dynamic changed. In a quick survey of the Times online archive, attacks in Britain during my period were usually carried out by men either on other men in business disputes, female ex lovers, or modern art (1986, painstripper Tate Gallery), cars (1986 - favourite weapon of car vandals), though politicians and the Queen Mother were threatened with acid attacks and these were taken seriously. In only one case did the newspaper report that the acid was homemade (and tested for strength on raw liver) and in the other cases, it did not report on how the acid was obtained.  A trend of note is the naming  of corrosive fluids with a specific purpose - paintstripper, oven cleaner - although not by brand. 

Other mischevious uses of household chemicals, for instance as cutting agents, seems to be discredited, at least in the 1980s and 1990s. Coombe’s Vim in the Veins and other reports into what is thought to be and what is actually done, are illuminating, and mean that any fears about household chemicals being used used to adulterate drugs are misunderstood. He reports that the additives are either bulking or functional, with the feared rat poison in heroin making more of the desired drug available when it is smoked. 

I freely admit that some of my research has been in response to current news items, such as the Russian ballet acid attack and the ammonium nitrate explosion in Texas. Taking the long view is important in these situations, to see what has changed or what has been learned (or not). The ability to instantly search for related events, is really useful and it is quite amazing to see that people are always surprised when industrial accidents happen. it is horrible, yes, but sometimes accidents do happen. The idea of people regressing from the idea of accidents happening to finding an external blame for everything fits with parenting theories and accidents in the home (mother increasingly to blame) and the use of products that are assumed by their users wouldnt’ be sold unless they weren’t too dangerous. There has to be a balance between accepting you can’t know everything, so placing your trust in another organisation, and then being responsbile for making further decisions about uses or storages.  

One aspect of research that I have not fully digested and asimilated yet is that of risk. I started off by trying to look at Beck’s Risk Society, though I am getting on better with a slightly later book of essays on technological risk and society by Mary Doublas and Aaron Wildavsky. This covers aspects such as consent and knowledge which have been at the back of my mind for some time, so I am relieved to find out there is solid work I can apply in that area. The focus is on the the United States, so I suppose my critical point is to find writing that addresses the UK, that either says that it is applicable or demosntrates that it is a different case. From what I’ve read so far, it seems broadly applicable with respect to institutions groups and individuals. 

The 