Sodium chlorate will make a good candidate for a study of a domestic chemical. 

It was used as weedkiller. It is currently (2009) withdrawn from sale because it needs to be assessed for safety. 

It is explosive and has been written on in an agricultural context by James Watson. 

It will probably appear in a history of the NI Troubles, as it was used in explosives as commercial Semtex, gelignite became harder to get/ make it go further. Because of this, it appears in Hansards in some debates about control of, and manufacturing of sodium chlorate being based in this country would be affected if sales were severely restricted. 

It was used in home made bombs and fireworks, contributing to the recomendations by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Explosives that science teachers leave out this information from their classes. This would be intersting to folow up, as the weedkiller would have been pretty easy to get hold of.

It might not have been branded with obfuscatory names, but there have been a lot of different packages of it, under brand names. Check to see what the names were - did they include sodium chlorate? 

Powder seems to have been the principle way it was bought with periodic interest from MPs about whether a form could be produced that would not work as an explosive, or whether a liquid form would be effective as a weedkiller - concentration was generally listed as the issue here, though I don’t see how that should matter. 

Fraser - deaths from poisonings 
The toxicity of household products in the quantities taken by children is still generally overestimated. Only one proprietary domestic product, a furniture polish, appears by name in the 20-year record. 

Less than one-fith deaths dues to accidental poisonings 1958-1977 were caused by non-medicinal products. 

Lead caused one thirds of deaths in the non medicinal category, but the source of lead was seldom listed. 
The corrosives that caused death were caustic soda, cresol, phenol and unspecified acides. 
Paraffin (kerosene) caused half of the deaths from petroleum products. Liquid polishes are included in this group. 
Ethylene glycol (antifreeze) probably caused 4 deaths and 
**Ethylene chlorhydrin, a solvent used in photographic use that appears particularly toxic, two.**
One death from a pesticide other than nicotine, fluoroacetamide which is inow in restricted use as a rodenticide. 
Single deahs were caused by ethylene dichloride (liquid glue), industrial hand cleaner, “paint”, paraphenylenediamine (hair dye), poyglycol ethers, **sodium chlorate**, sodium nitrate and soldering flux. 