Reference Managers

I have been giving some thought to reference managing software. It has been something of a procrastination activity, because I’m supposed to be writing a literature review. My stance is that if I was using a reference managing package that didn’t drive me to tears, then the literature review would be magically much more manageable. 

A major part of the problem is that I should have looked into this more carefully as soon as I was offered the PhD place. As it is, I’m 6 months in and not being on top of my references induces feelings of guilt and self loathing, and the volume of material is paralysingly overwhelming. When I started looking at options in September, I didn’t feel like I didn’t know what I was looking for or how to know if any particular system would work for me. 

How had I got here without already cultured a relationship with a particular reference management system? I have not taken a direct path to a PhD, so essentially I have repeatedly forgotten the pain of citations and bibliographies. For my BSc Biology, I’d used paper folders, not even index cards. At MSc History of Science I kept a running bibliography. Several years later during MA Museum Studies I wrestled with Word’s inbuilt reference manager. I have since been banned from using Word by my partner, based on the number of times he found me tearful after some kind of word processing struggle. 

My current situation is not totally disorganised, all my files are organised into structured folders on the computer and I have uploaded lots of them to Mendeley, based on the fact that several peers said it was good, it supports the citation style preferred by my university department and ought to be compatible with a variety of programs that I could write the thesis with. 

I became dissatisfied with Mendeley when it seemed especially bad at picking up the metadata in the files I was uploading. Titles of papers would be scrambled which was somehow more galling than it being blank, unneccesary information appeared in author or title fields,  the journal name missing or wrong. The file structure I had was ignored, so I had to create new folders, and I haven’t yet found a way to assign to folders according to tags or keywords. It feels like the kind of thing that is probably a function of this powerful sounding tool. Basically I resented  having to put in a lot of effort to correct things. 

On the plus side, I like the way that you can see what other people are uploading or reading, so far this has been for pure noseyness value as I haven’t had any amazing breakthroughs from this (yet). It is not offensive to look at, and I have used some ugly interfaces for work before. Ignoring the file structure meant I could make new files and assign things (though I still would have preferred this to be automatic). 

I was angry and I wanted to break up (not that Mendeley cared), I wanted something easier. The university librarians support EndNote which I decided against at the start of the year, but I can’t remember the exact reasons, possibly because I didn’t like the seemingly quite different levels of functionality between web and desktop versions. I only work on my laptop, not on university computers, so I’m not sure why this even bothered me, but having to choose between these two things was a major barrier to installing either. I like the sound of this institutional, face to face support, but equally, I could ask my peers for advice and Mendeley has support systems. 

Sente was suggested, so I downloaded a free trial. It looks lovely and technically you ought to be able to import data from Mendeley without going through an export system. I failed at this, and its probably my fault. When I tried uploading papers, I could only upload one by one, not by selecting multiple, even a single folders. This is offputting. I tried uploading perhaps seven papers individually, only one file’s metadata was recognised and read. Strike three and they were out of the running.

Zotero had been mentioned several times as the system of choice. I looked around for any blogposts from historians explaining why it was particularly good for them. I found one post from 2007 mentioning Zotero, but it was mainly about how great Firefox was Zotero’s twitter page also mentions Firefox. I haven’t used that browser for quite a number of years so it really put me off. It looked ugly. 

Papers got suggested on various forums, but immediately I felt excluded from the “click your subject area” which included sciences, business, geography - what, no history? As well as refering to “the images above”, when they were in fact below; my attention to detail klaxon blared,  Judgemental levels got yanked  up to 11 and these minor things riled me, so I did not try it out. 

Dedicating a couple of hours to looking at the alternatives felt annoying, but I also managed to refine some of my needs, rather than just wanting an easy system that doesn’t drive me to tears. This will help me to target my learning path to get to know Mendeley better. This means putting more investment in. This labour is probably the main thing that ties people to any particular system, as with pretty much any task or endeavour. I need to sit down and work out what I need to do, read the help documentation like a sensible person, have a few trial runs where I don’t have a consequential, externally imposed deadline to get frustrated about. Oh yes, and ask for help from the right sources when I need it. 