Aroma
The Cultural History of Smell
Constance Classen, David Howes and Anthony Synnott

ch5 p170 Laws of constuction/ planning regulate the distribution and circulation of smells (industrial) .
	industrial parks, garbage, sewage treatment plants  - general public are usually excluded and has no real interst in entering. Permanetly bad or repugnant smells usually rendered legitimate in this space, an unavoidable byproduct of the industrial process. 
	
	public spaces (residential, shopping, entertainment, parks) usualy olfactory neturality, except of food, smells that would be considered offenseive are usually banned by municipal sanitary by-laws
	
	smells of all sorts become legitimate in private space, the home. but smell pollution is more illdefined than noise pollution
	
Smell of manure is natural in rural setting (growth), but intolerable in an urban setting (decay). To inhabitants of a mill town the ulphuorous reek of a pulp and paper mill might well mean money and progress. The inhabitatints will hae beomc habituated due to constancy of it, so not have pronounced awarenes of it

p171 malodourus smells are tolerable by those who can make a profit from them. 

p172 development of antagonists - block aility to percieve certain odours. an olfactory screen to obviate the need to clean up. 
issue of smell pollution has moved beyond questions of what consittutes a bad smell and the importance o f unfouled air, what is now at issue is whether we have a right to freedom of smell. 

ch6 p180
natural body odour is stagmatized and suppresed, artifical body odour (perfumes colognes) is celebrated. Dream merchants of the perfume industry assure consumers taht ll good thins come to those with the right scent. 

fragrances added to detergents and house paints give a wide range of commodieites an olfactory odor - added aromas caryry meanings of status, freshness, effectiveness, withough i nany way being necessary to those products acutal performance. aroma of the comodity often works a sub/barely concious level is cruicail to perception of a product. 

ads used job securty during Depression years - Listerine “fired - for a reason he never suspected’ Lifebuoy soap - Don’t risk your job by offending with BO take no chances. When business is slack employers become more critical. Sometimes very little may turn the scales agains us. (1931) US or UK?

Perfume ads - less informative - focus on creating fantasy re effects of wearing perfume

p192 perfumery book from 1940 : steam laundries deliver our weekly wash delicately perfumed; there are scented paints and laquers for finishing bedsteas, dressing tables and writing desks...

what was a novlety has been found to make good business sences. 

Smell helps control memory mood emotions - a marketers dream. 
p193 consumers generally prefer scented products to unscented ones. Mareket test have shown tat when the right scent is added to a product, it will be percieved as more pleasing and also more effective and of higher quality. 

1966 Joy detergent had lemon scent aded to it. It in no way altered the substance of the detergen but it gavae consumers who associated lemonness with grease cutting ability the sense tha tjo had increased cleaning power. (ref25) 

p194 Jellinek notes that adding a mild fragrance to a detergent advetised as strong would reassure users hat it would not harm their skin. 