Bowlby - Carried Away

p61-2  on the value of sasonal window displays
*The Modern Grocer and Provision Dealer*
		In March, towards the month’s end, goods suitable for house-cleaning , such as brooms and brushes, leathers, house-flannel, polishing pastes, soap and cleansing materials should hae attention. It is then the thoughts of the housewife turn to spring cleaning and the grocer who is wise will aid her by suggesting that he provide the materials which will make the process a pleasure and a joy rather than a hard and upleasant task. (1937)
		
p63 walking the streets (and looking at window displays) to feel better (“shut-in women, lonely in their homes walk past the window with a slight sense of freedom and adventure)  most peoples live are habitually loaded down to be made lighter by the differences of he street. 

p80  UK,  1927 “tea cocoa and oatmeal for instance are no longer shovelled out of dusty bin, weighed in insanitary scales, poured into bags blown open by the breath of the shopkeeper, the last crumbs being swept in wiith scrupulous honestery if doubtful cleanliness from toff a littered counter: they are packaged in hygienic, air-tight containers, as fresh and clean and wholesome as when they  left the factory. 

see Franken and Larrabee’s Packages that Sell

the packages has revolutionised modern merchanising. It has changed the buying hapbits of a nation. The american of the day before yesterday asked for a pound of crackers Today his grandsom demands a box of Uneeda. ... has brought surpring economies for both the manufacturer and the consumer and has given to the consumer great gifts in the way of convenience. 
p83 packaging had to coney and sell = functional , getting the thing to its destinations, appealing a field for fashion and design. In practical terms -  roadworthy, packable and stackables. Packages made honest commodities of products of all kinds, boxing them up, measuring them out, assuring the owrld they were clean and came form a decent ascertainable source. Attracteive exterior might be quite unrelated to what was inside or that might show it in a better light, through a transparent wapper. 1928 - the fancy package together with the advertising of it, stimulates the senses, arouses the imagination adn therefore creates a ficticious value. 

p84 - impact of packaging greatest in food and pharmaceuticals. 

British pakcaging journal Shelf Appeal started in 1933 

1936 - editorial in Shelf appeal explains : Packagain is actually a coined word and was not used in this country until about three years ago (incidentally the original name for this journal wa packaging, but various difficulties prevented this, so that the more comprehensive title of Shelf Appeal was adopted). Oackagaing is really packing plus something else... the something else is sellign abililty, thus giving the package a double function - that of contianing and protecting and then of publicising and selling. 

‘package-consious’ - to refer to the state of enlightenment that can be attirubted to manufactures who have profited from their reading of shelf appeal. 

p86 wartime - firms are advised to use advertising to explain the reasons for lower quality, reduced supplies, reduced packaging and the elimination of unnecessary sizes and packs. Where economisin g on materials is morally and practically obligatory, it is not clear what whill count aas a good package. “It’s odd that no one has thgought of making a propaganda virtue of this necessity and urging patriotic purchasers to buy the prodct because is is flimsily packed. says Shelf appeal in 1940 

p88 newspaper ads or window displays or posters can be changed quite quickly if they are found not to work. But when packages are wrong - functionally or aethethically - they take more time and money to change. The package may fall apart in transi, or let the air in a nd damage the goods, the thing cna no longer be sold. Ot the packages appearance puts the buyer off. If packages stay the same over a long period, then much of their appeal if they do appeal, is in their familiarity. Packages should be recognisable, even before self service it is considered an advantages if the customer can identify the brand on the shelf and then ask for it by name. If the packet does n’t change then neither it can be supposed doe sthe quality of what’s in it. 

Pretty girls on packaging go out of date very fast. 

p95 - the unwrapped bar of soap in the chemists shop holds no more glamour than it can claim while waiting beside the bath. 

p97 packagin and advertising - createa sentiment/ an atomostphere, such that soap is seen differently from how it would otherswise be, it has an douter layer which becomes it , beautifies it and makes it what it is so that it cannot be seen apart form it. 

p101 discussion of cellophane - packaging’a lack of dicrimination about what it packages “the average consumer never used to think of a wrench as a gift for a man, but with the intorction of a special holiday wrap Walworth Stillson Wrenches were put int the gift class.   (PAckages that Sell)

p117 −118 festish and ceremony of picking out a crusty loaf removed by ordering standard baked bread by phone saves on work time -in order to earn leisure time. For both sexes, the damnds on time make it a valuable, finite uantity to be spared and saved and carefully managed so tht iti s not wasted. 
cosmetics - shop for something tha tis not only attractive when you buy ti, but will even provide a thrill of pleasure every time it is used. This is consumption as consummation not just once but over and over agein. It is in a different consumerly universe from slced bread, inidcating a division between kinds of consumption. The matter of fact vs he special pleasure. 

John Newsom 1948 (130)
The Education of Grils  a chapter on Women as Purchasers. her standards or lack of them, will be decided by the typ eand quality of good produced. goods which will adorn the homes and bodies of millions of poeple, provide satisfaction or irritation to those who live with them and affect the value our export trade. She determines our stanard of living. 
p131 0 the woman has a responsibility for the sucess of her country’s economy and also for the beauty of the domestic milieu. 
p132 women and children are made out to be vulnerable groups in teh 1960s  - targets of marketing. Educate the consumre or control the market. 
p133 1980s new rhetoric - shoppers are rational modern citizens , individuals with interest, rights and choices. Seeks best deal for self but includes concern for social welfare and national interest. Green and thical consumers are now separate categories of shopper. the supermarket is a place sof ethical behviour more than a place ot convenience or temptation. 

book - Hosuehold Engineerng 0 Christine Frederick (1920) scientific household mgt. 
book - the Hidden PErsuaders = Packard - bestseller became the most powerful of hidden persuaders (published 1957) 
 
 
 US - Welcome Wagon - hired neighbour who delivers gifs, coupons for more free gifts if the newly arrived resident visits the genersou local supermarket. Nice lady also paid to note number of children, year of car, type of residence, attidutes and preference in food shopping. Even befre entering the store, the customer is the object of a servey - needs to be known so that her needs can be anticipated. 