ch 7 “Consumers Associations and the State: Protection and Defence of the Consumer in France 1950 −2000”  Alain Chariot p123-136

political mobilisation, partsan sturggle, product scandals (Talc Morhange 1972), divisions among consumer associations, international models, EC policy, national legilation and a plan for codification = diversity of stakes posed by consumption in France in 1972

French govt was trying to associate its public policies with the expertise possessed by these actors in the field of consumption. The expertise sought from the consumer movements and from those persons designated by consumer councils was simultaneously a request for information, a recognition of their representativeness and a defense of contradictory interests. Creation of a secretary of state for consumerion in 1976 
 1981 newly born Ministry of consumption. 
 
 1970s were a decade of more general thinking about the place of associations in a democracy symbolised by a range of debates about the *cadre de vie* (living environment). 
 
 first generation of organisations were often family based, women specific or co-operative. 
 
 Rise of associations of consumers issuing from various union confederation shows the tensions internal to consumerism.  - “we keep in mind a concern to defend both salaried producers like ourselfs and consumers. IF we aimed only to defend the consumer, we might be led to fight only for the lowest price, without takign into account a need for thte social procgress that leads to increasing salaries and social benefts” president Consiel Economique et Sociale
 
 France - creation of a Bureau of Consumption at the Economic Programmes Dept of the National Ministry of the Economy in 1945
 
 Consumption seized by policy - 1976 − 1992
 creation of a Sec of State for consumption who drafted two new laws - one dealing with informing and protecting consumers in reation to certain credit opertations and one dealing with the same in relation to products adn servies. (1978) became a sort of headquarters charged with prparing a number of texts, but did not have the means to execute its decisions. Once the texts were voted and passed, it’s work was accomplised and the Sec of STate disappeared. 
 
 p133 − 1970 − 1980 were a decade in France of collective actio non the theme of defending the consumer. These demands did not take the shape of an alternative economic modela but were recieved by the state and policatl actors who responded by elaborating a complex legislative and institutional system. 
 
 see Gunnar Trumbull for ideal types of consumer protection = Germany GB = information, Sweden = Collective negotiation.   in The Politics of Consumption, Matieal Culture and Citizen ship in Europe and America. 
 
 The Organised Consumer movement since 1945 - Matthew Hilton p187 − 203
 
 p189 - Focus on testing of goods and services ws an inspiration to European shoppers - 1950s number of conusmer testing orgs began to emerge. France organised consumerism took on social movement, with campaigns and high levels of grassroots mobilisation. Grench consumers were responding in part to a set of general issues facing a risking generation of affluent shoppers. As western economies moved into an increasingly technologial and complex age where the traditional skills attrituted to the housewife shopper were no longer useful in the assessment of products, both male and female consumers sought institutional support to guide and protect them through the market place. 
 Netherlands - 1953 Consumentenbond formed from rural family and womeos bodies particularly the union of housewives, ffoundation for household inforamtion in rural areas. reaching one out of every nine Dutch families. 
 
 Belguim - Association des Consommateurs 1957 private organisation of individual shoppers
 
 Most sucessful imitator in afinancial terms at least of the American product testing model has been the Consumers’ Association UK. 1956 - cenre left traditions of Labour party. A  private organisation it maintained a close raltionship with the state, ist staff and ideas have heavily influenced govt initiatives like the conumer council, the office of fair trading and national consumer council. Encouraged local groups in 1960s
 
 Much consumer motivation emerges from adversity and detriment rather than the perplexities of expanding choice. 
 
 p194 - significance of conumer movement as an international pheneomone has been generally overlooked by contemporary historians who have preferred instaed to observe the campigns tactics and agendas of the more headline grabbing social movements concerned with human rights and environmentalism.  ... but respoectability of the consumer movement which held the key to its influence. IOCU becamse much more than just a faciliatoror of a collaborative testing mechanism. Took onboard rights based - saftey, informed, to choose, to be heard
 
 p196 campaigning networks had existed atht ehnational level and more general neteworks or federations existed within the labour and women’s movement the creation of single issues international compagn networks in the late 1970s was an important precenten which in many ways still has a fundamental influence on the nature of gloval civil soicety today. 
 
 IOCU has found itself dealing with necessities rather than luxuries (clean water, food, very basic needs) 