Lauding the Leisure Class: Symbolic Contec and Conspicuus Consumption 
Alan Shipman Review of Social Economy, vol LXII no 3 Sep2004

Expenditures that looked extravagent regain valid personal and social function. If the acts of buying and consuming yeild utility in themselves, it may not matter if what is consumed has little or no practical value. We may pay a premium for the company it puts us in , or rescues us from (Jaramiller 2000). We are what we eat and foods contain increaingly symbolic ingredients. The times and places we do  these things, the ompnay in which we do them also count toards and economic identity who focus changes from e workplace to the market place - from how er earn to how we spend. 

Symbolic consumption recasts distinction between use value and exchange value. 

Consumption need not be material to be visible and visiblity can serve social purposes other than ostentatious display (Douglas and Isherwood 1980) Conspicuous waste becomes the instant measure of relative social standing. Veblen 1994

Keynes quoting Heckscher on mercentalism, shows that ecomoists as far back as the late sicteenth centure were finding intellecitual justification sfor the “deep-rooted belief in the utility of luxury and the evil of thrift.” (p281 article)

CC is vulnerable to financial attack
	taxing proucts whose utility lies in status - 
			improves social justice (only affluent consumers are taxed)
			preserve economic efficiency (deter wasteful expenditure)
			
		Should become easier to enforce as elite spending shifts to items that are for display, distinguished from those the less advantged might be buying for their intrinsic utility. 
		
		A tax should not excite resistance from CCrs whose purpose is served by any widening of the gap between generic capabilities and purchase price (Leibenstein 1950)
		
		social preference and public policy reorientate CC - from physicality of consumption to consipcuity of preferences. Consumption of sumbolic goods expands with growing focus on the value of other peoples’ k, talkent and time beig purchased over and avobe (or instead of ) any physical inputs. Industial age of CC - collection physcial items, post industrial shifts to experiences. 
		
		**IS EXPERIENCE relevant to me?**
		
refocusing from waste to taste - branding 

p283 branding allows the premiuim priced symbolic content to be brough to the mass market. CC is brought within reach of the maerketplace majoirty, who can be seen to may more than is necessary for a product and any practical need it may serve. 

may believe a branded product to be a superior quality even if fuller info would disprove this.  (Which? and other consumer focussed / expert reviews work pretty hard to investigate this)

Brand appeal is traceable to an original superiority in design, production or delivery and the difficulty of knowing when cheaper imitators have caught up . 

Branded products are increasingly made in the same plant as cheaper generic version, quality may be higher due to assignment of better maetials (can bring in pea factory experience here!) 

Branded product may promise lower variation in quality, greater reliability, reduce risk of substandard producet when buying in an unfamiliar place or through an unknown intermediary. 

brand buyers= display ability to pay for extra quality, traditional CC. 

When no better than cheaper generic - preimium is for exclusivity, 

utility can become ongoing lifestyle - product becomes subscription fee. 

Brand building strategy - diamond exporters legitimise price fixing through a brand allowing buyers to pay extra for avoiding fakes or genuine articles sold from war zones. Timber growers underpin their premium  with sustainable logging certificates, and fairtrade food processors through the synthesis of concience and indulgence, via perception that directly paying growers gets a better (or excuses a worse) tasting fare. 

p286 - branding has shown its potential for wider and longer lasting price stabilisation than cartels. wich only ever worked for a limited number of commodities whose production and wholesaling can be kept highly concentrated. 

		
		