Which? 1989


3yr index

acid raid 87  Feb  82
Aerosols and ozone layer 88 Jul 302  - this is the subject of the font cover -Blowing your cover the oone layer is under attack. What can you do? See p302  [also on test this month and advertised on front cover: fly sprays - will it mention aerosol/propellant?]
		gives good comprehensive list about action taken by retailers and mfcrs. 


Air pollution  87  Feb  82
Allelrgies to food 87  Jan  6

Anti smoking aids  89 NAug 361 - purified tobacco rather than “nicotine” labelled, packaging looks like sweets, available over the pharamacists  counter. People becoming addicted as although low dose, is more effectively delivered than chewing prescip gum. 

Bedding plants? summer 87 Apr 188

Bread preservatives 88 Jun 264 - in response to consumers calling for healthy foods by remoing addivives and artificial preservatives - not all bread mfcrs have gone down no - preservatives route - in a few brands the two main bakers use vinegar to extend the life of their loaves. Som may use propionates - either propionic acid (a naturally occurring fatty acid) or its salts E280 to 283. West Germany banned propioinats due to possilbe link to stomach cancer.  Brands not named. 



Caffiene and healt 87 Mar 114
Calcium enriched milk 87 Jul 301
Cement burn 88 May 212 , 88 Nov 508
		ordered ready mixed concrete - knelt fo some of the time, leg of jeans becames wet with the liquid qhic cathered on top o fthe concrete. Many are not aware of the denger - adequate ppe. We think all suppliers of cement or cemet based products hould provide safety info. Warnings appear on the prepaked cement prodcts but appear to be aimed only at those with sensitive skin. Sucess - British REady Mixed concrete Assoc is now recommneing that all their members revise the warning on delivery tickets to be clearer (apply to all). 


detergents for dishwashers 87 Nov 540 (dishwashers appear a lot 87 Apr, Nov, 88 Nov, 89, nov)
Drugs misuse 88 Jul 332
Vn improving 87 Jul, 318
Env health hazards 89 Apr 188
Env issues 89 158
Fly killers 88 Jul 338
	Getting rid of pests - methods to avoid, persistent problems anti killer, poisonous ant bait, proprietary wasp killer or call pest control, poisoned mouse bailt containing chemicals such as warfarin, calciferol, difenacoum or alphachloralose must be used very carefully, or leave ot experts, silver fish insecticide spraws powders for crawling insect, cockroaches nocturnal so spray insecticide into daytime hiding places or onto surfaces they crall accorss. no mention of safety of having to cover surfaces with chem. 
	
	Tests on fly killers - 
	ives active ingredient - pyrethoids, diazionon, permethirn, bioallethrin, dichlorovos, pirimiphos-methyl, pyrethrins, tetramethrin, lindane, fenitrothion, glue
	lists aerosols as cheapest and most effective. Most were Hydrocarbon propellant, 3 out of the 4 CFC propellants claimed to be reviewing use of CFC
	recommended products were Big D fly and wasp killer - lindane and tetramethrin
	Keen Flying insect killer tetramethrin and fenitrothion
	Vapona fly killer permethrin and bioallethrin all with 90%flues knocked down in 10 mins or less
	does not mention smell, only knockdown time and efficiency of killing. 
	
	Pesticide safety - use sparingly, follow instructions carefully, avoid direct contact, don’t use what you measured pesticide out with for anything else, do not transfer unused pesticide to food or drink containers, lock away, notify everyone in the house and neighbours if necessary. It’s illegal to use pesticides in ways that are not approved - if used approved anti killer to tackly any other crawling insect not specified on the lavel. This might mean buying a lot of diferent products with similar ingredients to treat different pests. 
	
	Label explained - only active ingredients and instructions/ cautions have to be listed 
	
	electic kilers - noisy, sparks, over half the flies still survived. 
	slow release blocks, slow to act - not recommended
	Consumers union warned about slow release fly killers lusin dichlorovos - some  American bands showed that long term use increased the risk of cancer. UK govt depts considering american data, reconsidering risk from UK products. 

Food additives labelling 88 May 214, 88 Jun 264
Fungicides on citrus fruit 89 Jan 4 - wax and chemicals coat peel. some evidence form lab test tat in sufficient quantities they may produce cancers of mutations in animals. Govt not worry, levels of funcide permitted are v low.Seville oranges imported specially are not treated. Could they dissolve in an an alocholic drink - tests in progress. ECproposal to indicate to consumer about post harvest treatments. 
Garden jobs for spring 88 apr 182 (new feature?) 
Garden jobs for autum 88 sep 410
Green lifestyle 89 Sep 430
Looks at things like phosphate free washing powders, explains why phosphate was added but not what they have been replaced with. Phospahtes to soften water and impove clenaing poweder. In large quantities in solo moving rives/lakes they cause over growth of algae - in UK sewage works seem to be coping with phosphates and this sort of pollution has been found in a few areas. 
Biodegradable wahing powder an washing up lique? All washing poweders and washing liquides are biodegradable, to a lage extent sinc ethe suractants have to be at least 80% biodegradable yb law. It may be that gree products biodegrade faster and more thoroughly, as surfactants based on veg oils rather than petrochems. [This does not look at sustainability of veg oils vs petrochems]

Hangover cures 88 Dec 559
Health at work 87 sep 422
Mail order shopping green products 89 Dec 646  -  thought provoking green gifts but don’t expect them to save the world. Acid rain test kit needed more info about acid rain. 
Pesticides on food 88 Aug 356
Pesticides safety 88 Jul 339
Pollution 87  Feb 81 (inc Chernobyl)


sex attractant sprays 89 Jul 308  - not descibed as chemical - marketed a pheromones - smell substances secreted by animals, control certain animal behaviour, pheremones can be chemically synthesised [not manufactured] - forget it. 



