Medico Legal Journal 
PArt Two
1976
Vol 44
33-47 poisoing by paraquat

with ref to R ve Roberts & Kenyon

by Prof Donald Teare and Hon Mr Justice Steen Brown. 

p33
parawuat in the last 11 yrs in the British Isles inc Repof Ireland where it is a failry commeon form of poisoning, killed 240 people and that is negligibely compared with the hundres of thousands that it has probably saved. 

Gramoxoone - 20% soln in water. 
Weedol - keen gardeners - 2.5% paraquat and 2.5% diquat granules dissolve in water 

p34 inactivate by clay. Som of you if yo uhave read the insturction on Weedol will hnotice that it should not be used on pure peat or peat sand composts as they do not fully inactivate the chema dn this still remains avilable fo rabsoptopn. 

peculiarly toxic to man. fatalities as little as 1ml. 

small incidence of disesase. 

sadly enough the poison has fequently been stolen from an employer and left lying around for children and other unsuspecting persons to drink. 

Gramoxone has been relatively inoffensive to the smell, but this year has been "stenched: as the commercial term goes and now has a most offensive smell. This does not mean that it cannot be ingested by those determined to do so , meths has an offensive smell to you nad me but it can still become an addiciton to those tho wtake to it. 

accident diminishing but suicide is increasing. upt to 30 in 1974 and probably 32 or so this year. Of the unknown sthere are 2 homicides of which we know in this country, one is the main subject of this paper and one in scotlan which many of yhou have read of where the defendant said she had poured the gramoxien away down the sink and some must have got into the soup. 


p35
not until 27 nov was the result of a chance remark of a probation officer - kenyon family were know to probation officers before this event  - to the ward sister : do you think he might have been poisoned?" and the sister mentioned this matter to a yhoung house phsician who said "what about paraquat?"

urine, sent to roy goulding. 

wife knew the reasons, no emotion, never any help on the clinical coditions which might have helped with his tmt. 

p36
44yr old man history of suicidal attempts = found in bed by his wife one morning with a packet of Weedol with him which was only a quarter full. Had stonlen it from neighbours allotment shed - I do not think for one moment for the purpose of treating weeds - and probably eaten like sweets for sevearl days. 

p37
valuable herbicide and little risk for the person usuing it. It's economic value in avoiding soil erosion and rendering land available for immediate cropping is undispited. 
product the most unpleasant form of death of any poison but it is doubtful tat stenching othe proparation will deter the suicide. It should however minimise the risk of accidnetal swallowing. 


Justice Brown.
p39
Kenyon told Mrs Hemmings that she had read an article in the *News of the World* about paraquat about a case reported, an inquest in fact it was I think at Blackpool - where it was alleged though I add not proved that a husband had given a wife the paraquat in a glass of sherry. 

The NotW artile was produced at the trial. It was exhibit 52, dated 4 Nov 1973 and it set out the effects, that it wa fatal, undiscoverable except by post mortem. 

She asked Dave to make some of this stuff availalbe and asked MRs Hemmings to write down what Dave said, . She was bus with the tlephone and she had a young child with her and Mrs H at Mrs K's dictation wrote down the nae and address Mrs Smith Though pound and the word Gramoxone. Mrs K had to spell it out letter by letter as it ws given to her over the phone. She did not know about gramoxone. Mrs K could not pronounce or remember the owrd Gramoxone. She had to hand over the piece of paper onwhich it was written to the assistnatn. The assistnat a young man, having had the message from his superior opened the wire cage
p40
he did not worry aobut the poisons Act or the register 0 he did not seeka ny identifcation of the woman to howm he was handing it and he handed over a quart bottle of Gramoxone wrapped in brown paper. 