4 what it's worth - channel 4
28.5.85
chemcial time bomb investigated. 

Penny Junor reporting

supermarket or grocer 
perfect lliking fruit treated with substantial quantities deadly chemical poison
so poisonous that caterpillar can't even walk on it
Food and env protection bill
uncovers trail of alarming evidence
chemical time bomb

footage of planes spraying Agent orange and of deforemd children. 
fire at seveso and last year at bhophal.
500 000 people poisoned
10 000 people killed 

Dr alastair HAy
chemical patholgoist leeds lunivierty

bought examples behind him in local supermaket. SBK, Weedol, Murphy's liquid malthion, Murphiy's Tumbpleweed. Pathclear.
readily availble. 
effect on human beidng - wide spectrum - varies according to chem - nere, liver, immune system, cancer 
short term and long term - mre worrying is longer tuerm don't know wha tit will be. 

Filmed outside the entrance to a works, but the name of the company has been blocked out. 

profitiable buisness - ICI largest £635 m world wide @83 million profit
links in the chain
unwittingly eat them

GMBUnio - David Gee. hazardous job, particularly with pesticides, research just hasn't been done. Sterility, dermatitis, chloracne, nervous system. 

Joseph Mark worked at an ICI producing paraqyat - 1976 became ill - keratosis
don't know how many affected. Dont'know how it will affect them. 
Brit AgChem Association
does not accept the connection

In practice large cos are bad at communicating - not written down, training and briefing inadequate.

poster with racially appriopriate characters and scnetery  pictoral and writing, big crossed out actions

JM didn't have to wear protective clothingdidn't warn us, go home in own clothes. Accepted compensation, still to pay out, 10 years to work out. 
1bn gallons of pesticides.
everyday part of farmworkers job. 
horticultural worker - fill containers with 245 T - lump on neck, cancer of blood, bone marrow and lymph glands. Had read quite a lot about them, in Readers Digest. Did use clothing but could still taste. it, would go to fridge to get mug of milk to wash taste away. 
no legal controls over what can and can't be used. 
chemicals used here are banned in other countires inc russia turkey and japan!
voluntary code of practice. 
Reg Green Head of H&S Ag section TGWU
isn't somethign we can leave to a gentleman's afgreement.

farmers and farmworkers are dependant on the brit ag chem industry for their info. 

primary method of comms is label on package of product - instructions, safet precautions which ought to be followed.

lots of different methods of spraying shown. 

anyone of us walking in the country could be sprayed.

woman walking with difficulty across patio
"I was in my garden planting a hectare of daffodils, didn't take notice of helicopter which was sweeping  0 it was there for about 3 hours and I went on planting. We all became ill. Heather cameron. Lost and ovary, tumours out of gut, 
can't think of anything else that would have made her ill. 
normal healthy housewife in my wn garden planting blulbs
drs didn't know, testingfor cancer, leukemia, eradicated every source of contamination bar chemica. Authorities unhelpful. 
uphill battle to prove there was a helicopter. 
more concerned to show that there the helicopter was not there. 
thought she might be industrial spy trying to find out formula. 
operator only had to forewoarn me 

soil association - spray drift research
accident or misuse we'd like to see that diminished 
Peter SEgger soil association
spray drift out of control

cosmetic appearance of food - pesticides are necessary
over production - concentrate on how food is produced. 
controls saves money for farmer, less residues for consumer, environment saved. 

risks to us eating the produce every day
monitored for over 20yrs, by min ag
diet sampling
genearlly low levels, below desired leveles and decreasing

sent 10 samples to be tested

double problem - export killer chemicals banned in this country and reimport the products consuming witout knowing about it

contaminated food = affected people, nonfunctioning - anxiety, heart, muscular
stomach ache, twitching, headaches, depression, pains in bones
nightingale hospital
thos years of chronic incapacity were nothing to do with my mind

Dallas Env Centre - Bill Rea
studies done on pesticide contamination
in his opinion there is no safe level

Producer, user (applyer),  consumer

misse opportunity, no more access to information than previously, no money to test, to improve training or to increase labelling on food products. 
