Cloudburst!
Brass Tacks 
17/04/86 
darkness ambulance, sirens, chemical plant   ominous sunthetic beats sound. 
fumes
full protection suit

in a world dependent on chemicals 
is haunted by catastrophe
until it happens, few of us weigh up the risks
ask that odds are stacked against disaster   --- dice/ smoke/ fumes

are we ready for when a sea of deadly gas rolls through our streets?

ICI Runcorn
toxic gas chlorine
showing an emergyency drill, practiced regularly and in earnest
All very calm and stilted. Gas masks
1 of 200 chem plants classified as major hazard sites. Must demo effectiness of safety procedures. 
lots of buttons, flashing lights

Su Carrol - reporter. 

People living in the vicinity must be told of the danger and what to do in an emergency. 
But are 1000s of people living in ignorance?

Why is Britains leading chem co so reluctant to plan for disaster. 
Response to a decade of disaster
Flixborough - fire, black smoke, sirens, domestic houses, 28 people died
Mexico 1984 - tanks containing natural gas exploded 600 dead
Bophal - 40 tons toxic gas escaped killing 2500
body bags, coffins. 

Stephen Grant - very good track record. Good fortune and good management .
sitting in armschair - domestic? with lamp? He looks a little uncomfortable. Have lost large tonnages of flamable vapour without it ignighting. 

People of Runcorn are used to living around chem - risk of unempoloyment against distant specre.

industry in the town since the turn of the cnetury. 
Had to come to Runcorn for the job. Work situation - biggest employer
Bingo hall - vox pops of older ladies. 
Secure place to work, if a young man or woman can get a job w ICI its great. 

Kevin Baritmote ICI plant manager
we look after the public - 

sinc Jan this yr 1500 m Told about danger of chlorine and what action to take
"Public information zone" go inside - close all window nd doors. But those living outside the zone will not have been todl what to do in an emergency.
Images of gas holders accross the road from domestic houses.

Bingo vox pops
Why haven't they sent ICI sent leaflets (corrected by other lady that they have se
I don't know what they make there.   
You just don't think.
Since the other disasters you think aobut your own town. 

Convinced saftey record 

own amb, fire engine and med team to contain disaster. 

1970 cl gas cloud escaped and affected children on playing field. 
Green haze - children becan to be sizk, just one chil had to be taken to hosp he sufferd from asthma. 

Can't do without cl. 
Helps make hundreds of valued products. 
clean our homes, Enrich soil, protect hygiend

Can we trust those tho make cl to protect us from its dangers.?
Interview with Robin Paul Dept Mg Director - looking down at the desk, in an office, folders of info
essential commoditiy chemical, goes in to procuts which are in every household (PVC , cean water)
Looks down at desk most of the time, 

Elaborate fail safe device - an absorbption plant. 
Images of warning signs - goggles in this area
Flaashing light big orange sign - leave this area. 

Man in gogles and hard hat, tie, shirt, smartish outdoor coat in front of plant - our licence to operate. £10m to build. Designed to take full factory load for 15mins.  then further 15minutes to shut the factory down. 

Describes back up.  Even if entire of Mersey ide loses electricty. 
Vent stack designed so that if there is a vent, its so high up that it will be dilute by the time it gets back to ground level

Chemical warefar 0 Battle of Ypres, images of trench warare. 
kills by attacking te lungs - showing film fottage
luncgs fill with liquid, similar to drowning. 
Precisie knowledge is limited. 
HSE - ecided the Cl is so dnagerous that even a smbrief exposure 

populations/ people vary in thier suspceptibility
cl, ammonia, or many of the other toxic  gases 

eldery, 
ashtmatics (showing chilren in playground)
medical conditions. 
trivial does for one person might mean death for another - at the two extremes that might be the case. 
Distance it cantravel is still not known - shows man walking in to lab greeting anothe rman in a labcoat, flasks everywhere, have found a shaker machine to film. 

Manchester UMIST - reconstructions of resleases in WW!
70tons release over 20min, people found dead 500-700 dead people chosen for their fitness. 
cattle dead 10 km distance
ambulances, sirens, 

30000 tons cl
long before legislation they had their own plans.
Contain gas pool under polythene
(alrm sounds, full body suits etc) 
If it escapes into wider area ICI triggers operation cloudburst and the local emergency services are alerted
Wind. Need to know how much has been released. Direction, speed and densits
Calculated, 
Map and overlays,  - not computers. 

considered spillig 20 tons and would up to 1500 m from the source
never spille 20 tons cl, nor threatened life of anyone off site in that time (100 yrs)

presses for what the effects - eyes, nose
level of release - something bout 5-6 tons. 

Not an exact science - crude

make people cough
I think that's a grave understatement - Says Richard Griffiths of UMIST polln Research Unit (of the reconstructions) 

1.3km for 50% fatalities. 

catastopic failure of a sotrage tank - dense cloud - 300 tons cl will escape instantanously. 

We haven't planned for larger ones. 
Protective systems, design of vesses. 

looks very uncomfortable. Don't believe it will happen (storage tank) not a credible event. 

Tony Barrell. HSE sitting at desk. responding to prev statemtne
Anything is credible, some things are extraordinarily unlikely. 

I don't think they are only planning for a 20ton release. They do not accept catastropice failure is credible. 

I think they should This is the sort of the thing that will form part of that dialogue. Anxious that people do consider these remote events. 

Are you tellig me you are not satisfie with the level of their planning?
No, I'm not saying that, I don't know that they aren't planning for this. I'd be very surprised if they weren't taking into account the failyre of 

Value judegemnt - credible, incredible event
Careful desgn, good testing, quality control, safety meansure, still left with things outside your own control. 
(image of plane crash super imposed onto plant)
air craft control. 
less than 7km from liverpool airport.

ICI experessed concern to Director of airport about an aircarft crashing or landing, flying low over the 

Capenhurst is prhibited, ICI is not
real concern, rather than subjective concern. Civil Aviation Authority would have made them prohibited or otherwise. There's risk in everything but the level of risk is not such that those plants would need restricted. 

Same odds of plane coming through your own house. 
Stats - gives examples - sounds incredible, but that's what happened at Bhopal. 

Probablility vs Improb
work out probability of every concievalbe accidtent. 
Shots of people in casion. 
Don't know the number of sides a dice has, or the values of the spots until you've throuwn them. 
Risk analysis - cant set up thes ums to describe every contingency. Weather, etc... 
People make judegements of a subjective nature when thinking about whether a horse will win a race. Chem plant is more complicated because outcomes are not known in their magnitutde. 

Each chem co must prove its eafe in detailsed tech report "safety case"
Widnes
maintains that the worse credible accident was 2 tons from a hose. Frequncy that worst case very  - once every 500 thousand years. 
Put like that that its nonsensicle, ludicrou. Plant will not run for that lengther of time. 
One in 500 0000 chance that will happen per year. 
Cmpares to predicting number on a pair of dice - might happen the first time you throw it, might happen somewhere in 36 throws or not at all n the first 100 thows. 
Doesn't mean that it can't happen tomorrow. 

ICI keep coming back to the years... and the catastropihic failure of the storage tank. 
Safety case is to set a framework - sounds like different ideas. If we persuade them that there is no danger, there is no need for us to plan. 
We've considered them in order to reject the possibility. 

1981 - HSE criticiesd ICI cl at Blackpool - secondary supports of storage tank were very corroded. 

Griffiths ahs calculated what would happen if storage tank catastropihcially. 

Using a comoputer model - calculated effect of people caught out fo doors in averge waether. 
Covering the whole of runconr. Expect how many people to ie. Big red area larger yellow area. 
small proportion 5% - 100s people killed at worst., only in this set of weather conditions. 

Never had a potentially fatal accident outsie our boundary 
Taken artibary asumption - flexiblty resopnd to emergency. 

Design is such that we will not have that event. 

Have you made plans to cover that event. 
Can I just be clear then. You are telling me you have not considered the 

No point in me asking what hazard ranges and lethal doeses. No. 
Essential that emergency services know this. 

ICI say their worst credible accident could only cause coughs etc in the public information zone. 

flies in the face in expert opinion. 

Yes that kind of thing can happen. Well why not inform the public?
Make a judgement. 
Needs expereince - [it isearly on in the notification scheme - see how it goes?]

Ends on vox pop in bingo hall
That's how I rest in bed at night, theres someon else looking after that side of it - I depend on them safety rules being carried out. 

Research:
 Susie Taylor and Mark Gregory
 Producer
 Rob Rohrer
 Exec Colin Cameron. 
 

Peter Taylor - standing infront of map of Britain spots showing sites listed as major hazards. Further 1600 registered sites where dangerous substances are kept and handled. Thousands more unregisterd smaller firms that store and use these chemicals, make paint, pesticides, fertilisers antibiotics, furniture, batteries. 
If you feel threatened give our talkback team a ring now. Have we got balance right between benefits and risks?




Talkback
Cloudburst
24/04/86
glossop - gateway to beautiful hillcountry but on bad days a most unlovely lovely problem
shows smoke / vapour swirling accross town/hillscape
older lady saying how she has to get people to carry shopping for her, can't get breath, can't breathe after a minute of being out of car.

Barbara McGlinty is asthmatic - chimney lays her low. Can be walking over the tops of the hills and drifts of the chimney are going to hit you. You haven't got out into fresh air. 

Molybdiunm processing - belches forth sulphur dioxide, main component of acid rain.
Glossop Clean Air Campaign. 
Valley is subjected to 8tons everyday. 
Streets beneth bear witness - rooves are streaked, cars are stained, ripped the paint of them. Doesn't wash off. 
Washing out - gets blue speckles. Even the dog, little white westie, he came in blue. Just a menade. 

Ferro alloys - 7 stations monitor continuoulsy, below level set by EEC. 
certain amount of alarmist misinformation put out to lead people to that conclusion. No scientific evidence. 

Asbestos was safe until a few years ago! - blue speckles vox pop man

Why do people prefer the evidence of their eyes and noses rather than the scientiifc reassurances. 

Fires at works, Jan-Mar,  not only those only two more - poison cloud terror - maidstone  pesticide factory which happened a matter of hours after last weeks Brass Tacks. 

repeat of some of last weeks sections. 
(Ted Tierny, Tony Barrell)
We asked you to phone us
some thought we'd been unfair to the company

ICI employee from Runcorn, "safety is paramount when youre its constantly rammed down your throat"
should we live in houses designed to withstand falling stars?

Mr John of Suffolk - danger of plants is the complacency of those in charge
Chemist from norfolk - It's because the public are so badly informed they're not demanding the industry clean up its act.
Douglas Pickett
Live ear a storage tank 50 tons of cl - firm doesn't have to inform residents of what to do in an emergency. This I feel its wrong, no matter how much chlorine is on site residents should know what to do in an emergency. Just because there's less than 50 tons doesn't mean that its quite safe and I feel very strongly about this. Grimsby. 

John Davies Oswestry
I've been in the chem ind all my working life and I know what, precautions we take when working with hazardous materials on site. There are some 328 000 in the industry,  some of us living close to our place of work so we'll be the first to be affected if something goes seriously wrong at work. And when we leave work we want to get home safe and sound and we want to find our families safe and sound when we get there.  In the history of the chemical industry, we have never killed a member of the public by operating chemical plant in the UK. 

DAvid Sealey   Belper
I live near an oil refinery on March 3rd 1986 there was an explosion followed by a fire, explosion, closing of roads, evacuation of staff. Wrote to HSE to discover why fire, what steps to prevent fire occuring again. SEemed particularly impt as f or many years had been told that the possility of this occuring was neglibilr. Feel extreme anger that this event took place and frustration that no progress can be made in ameliorating the effects made by the plant on the area.

HSE set up 12 yrs ago. Executive has its own problems, as industry increased, its facotry inspectors have decreased   field officers - 1979 952 facotry inspectores 825 .46 air pollution 40  Visits in all areas were down 216 000 in 1980 to 187 000 in 1984  14%
Has to ensure proper adherence to regulations. 
Ellesmere Port - hazard ghetto, dirty smelly and dangerous 5 major hazard sites
Associated Octel and Calor gas
EEC regulation must notify residents of risks
Crescent road have been notified  -some of them have. Sent letters. Calor gas stopped halfway along. - radius stops there. 
New legislation has left people anxious and confused. 
Only sending it out because of the new law and its been round unknow to anyone. It is more dangerous than what we think.
Boat museum - nostalgic day out for 100s of people
plans for garden centre
advicsed against it because public could be at risk. 

Need jobs in Ellesmere port - 22%unemployment
build a hotel nr boat museum 7m pounds.  (after the fire of mill) 
will take reponsibility for those risk. 

John Porrit. Director FoeHow do you argue with someone here in an area like EP where unemp is so high that safety comes second?- 
Always been tradeoffs between the benefits that come from industry and the risks that one incurrs and what I feel is quite here is that some of those tradeoffs have been made unwisely and that the environment, the physical and the human environment has suffered too much as a consequence of that...  What we're seeing now 're getting the tradeoffs better adujusted, we  can see the risks for what they really are.And make ecisions accordingy.
as

Always as an advanced industrial society goign to have to take decisions like that, env movement - that unless it can be proved categorically to be acceptable that we should not proceed and should find alternative ways of creating jobs. 

Stop digging peat on Islay. 
This is what happens when people get their facts twisted. Those who said there was threat to jobs were lying Those who said there was threat to  economy were lying. The issue was an important one. There would be more work created there than less. Brings us back to the cruscial point of information and using the information to arrive at the right decision. 

Isn't being on the dole unhealthy?
 being on the dole is of course is unhealthy, but dying of some particularly nasty form of pollution or having ones health severely affected by exposeure to toxic materials is much more unhealthy than that. 
 
 choice of living in fear of that proposed factory or choice of saying no i do not want that company here. Union Carbide - bhophal.
 Livingstone told the company to get packing. Everybody was terrified. 
 
 Do you think that what happend people are more concerned and aware of chemical pollution? 
 Not simply in this town but Throught the world. 
 uneasy
 
 Abbey chemicals
 a few hundred yardfrom peoples homes. extension went up without people being told or asked and they were wrorried enough already (images of child playing in garden, woman hanging laundry to backdrop of steaming chem work)
 
 vox pop from resident
 Dust, smell is terrible. Smell varies - tell you own version of the smell, some will say rotten eggs, some will say sulphur. Would feel errible if my wee girl got some kind of disease. 
 
Had tour of factory. Just have to believe everything manager said. Workers wear masks all the time. 
 We don't we masks outside the factory, that's what we're complaining about. 
 Were you reassured by your trip? No. 

It should be investigated for the Next generation, children not born yet. We don't know that consitsts of this whatever it is. 

Martin Trowbridge
Isn't it symptomatic of how much industry has lost public confidence?
Our industry needs to work hard to retain  public confidence and indeed build it up. On of the problems we suffer in the industry is peoples general ignorance of what the chemical industry does and that's largely our own problem and why in the last two or tree years we've benn making efforts to interest people in what the industry does and how we handle hazards safely and in that sense I ahve to say that we very much welcome the regualtions to inform people. I would say inform people as much as they can possibly take in. 

Shouting over concept of fear - don't think they were frightened, they were talking about amenities... (they were frightened)
chem mfc - soc cannot exist without chem mfcr. 
People would rather chem industries went somewhere else. (does not say NIMBY)
keep doing it, keep going on reassuring them. Taking them round the factory is an excellent thing to do. Havin g and open door day next september. As an industry we have nothing at all to be ashamed of. 

Contraty to popular belif Grimsby doesn't smell of fish, it smells of chemicals. Daughter sent home from school with a note to keep an eye on her as a yellow substance invaded the premises. She was sick twice that night. She seems fine now but I don't know what it was as  noone will admit it was their chem. I worry about her future life. And due to this I want to move to the country where I believe both my children will be able to grwo up healthy. 

Everyday we make use of proucts of the chemical industry. We choose to do this, noone forces us to do this, but if we do we have to accept the risk thats assoc with their mfc. We have to ask the question then whether the benefits outwight the residual risk. I do. without a chem indu, no suft furnishings, no aircarft, no cars, no complex operations as there would be no safe aneasthetics available and no safe drinking water. 


Startling clarity - enourmous gulf between two sides, can it be gridged. 

All arranged like have I got news for you etc. 
John Porrit and Dave Gee, from GMB union

recognsie that being in business of hazrdous industry not just serving shareholders also protect interest of local communities. Want action not pious words. One particular initiative - provide peopel with the information that they need so theyre fully informed. Appalling record. Keep things secret wherever possible. HSE aren't pushing interest hard enough. 
Mr Trowbridge - didn't think there was much of a gulf. Beginging to reveal the matter of the gulf which is the perception of facts. The undsutry are very anxious to give you facts, leaving aside trade secrets, those are problems exporting overseas your knowhow unpaid, tell the public as much as you possibly can. 
doesn't accord with what Porrit says or 1/3rd viewers who phoned worried about plant at the bottom of their garden When they rang them all they got was a smooth pr man

Not get the info that they would like to hear such as there is a serious problem when there is no serious problem. Companies convey what is needed under new regulations. Must go out more and more and tell people what is happening. 

Let us have support for getting information which is not under trade secrets, which is published, out there and known. 
Views of risk sand state of plants - not trade secrets info given to workers and should be given to commnity as well. 

Given to people in the workplace and they are in the position to make a judgement. 
What was said earlier about bribing  people with jobs (??) 
1) common interest in sucess of the enterprise
2) understand the technology involved. 
Educate the public a lot more before they are able to make those complicate judgements. 

Phil Ward
Work in chem ind
common sense and complacency are 

has brains and common sense to do more - people can be made more aware 

Trowbridge - last 10yrs HSE in the workplace
balance has been made - interest in the enterprises, common understanding of the words using, 
Entering decade or 20yrs of envir - have to evelop same language and perception. Find areas where we're not in disagreement. Then find out why we are in disagreement. 

Does that mena anything to you? No abosultel not. That's not what we're talking about. 
Establishign a framework in which to make decision. Gives me nothing to hope for pious rhetoric that youve said for years. 

Peter Bone
no point in creating barriers. 
Orocess are risky, natural concern, esp people who live close to chem plants. 
Environmentalists have got to acknowele that industry is not totally negative to env, safty problems, not toally profit orientate, does put safety amonght highest priorities. Must build diagloue that each sie recognises the problems. 

Credilbity gap exists - not helped by the publicity that appears on the chemical side, much more than it is not helped by that which appears on the envi side. What credibility do you have with the general public. Sellafield - major newspaper asked rep cross section of readers about whether thay believed BNFL or FoE on 10 std questions, 95% FoE. Don't want to close down chem indu in this country. Believe in tradeoffs. 

People living near chem industy are the people we have to convince. 

I wouldn't live down wind of a chlorine plant, within 5miles. 
I hae no more worries following that programe last week. 

In general they are not telling the truth - just simple things like having a good safety records. Killed 17 of our memebers from a substance. No studies into ill health. Do not know what hemicals are doing. Turned down our proposal. HSE figures. 

Testig materials - spending publics money, it is the people who consume the chemicals who will pay for all this, on searching for a needle which may or may not excist in a haystack which we don't know wher it is, really quite impractical.

Clearly a shift in the balance of power between industry and environmentalist. Are you worried that your inutry will face greater restricitions? 
That's looking at it from the negative point of view. Positive contine to work hard, dismissed as PR to inform public to interest the public, to make them relaise what we're doing for society and they should listen to what we say. Work with haz mat but in a safe way. A much much increased education movement. 

public money - 
Beneefits to chem ind are privatised -remain within the industry, many of the  costs in producing chemicals are spread thorughout society, community and env pick up the costs. Cost internatlised, put to dealing with thos eproblems. Takign a responsible part of society. 

(Discussion would liek to go on. )
Discussion is only just starting. 
At the next gen election will be tinged with more than a hint of gren. 