It gets into everything 
Heritage pt 5

Dead bird in field

Peregrine falcon - accidentally involved in more modern methos of food gathering. 
15acre field - very large for cabbages. Essex. 
Get the best out of modern mechanical methods have to farm on this scale. 
[ridicoulously white coat]
ecosystem - check a check on each other in a woodland
insect can markc across a simple ecosystem liekt this. so he has to spray. 
Millions of square miles not just a habit but an almost obsession. dozen of formulations
Insecticides -chlorinated hydrocarbons - organochlorines. cheap an easy o use. DDT most famous. New ristsant strains of insect diminisnh its power but its heyday it was unbeatable. 

Commercial aple spraying in apple orchard in south of england. 
We use 12 sprays a year. Pre blossom spray - DDT against caterpillar. Impt ton control them - 90% of fruit would not be marketable. Using funcicides after blossom, if we didn't use this they'd all be marked. 
Dieldrin used to be used as a sheep dip - knocked out many of teh parasites that mmade the life and death of sheep a misery. Now known to be so toxid its banned as a sheep dip altogheter. 
Seed dressing - built int protection esp against the  wheatbolt fly - 
Only to use for winter wheat so when there's plenty of other food around for other seed eating. 
hawk falcon or an owl. 
bodies collected by RSPCB and taken to monkswood research station. 

[images of feeding baby birds) 

esp raptors. skins and stuffed carcases silent testimony to slaughter of the 60s
finding the link was not at all easy. 
peregrine falcon lie a canary down a mine had to die to give us a sign of danger. 
Dr Derek Radcliffe. 
British trust for ornithology
fuss made by pigeon fanciers about perigrin predation. 

Death of adult burdsdue to acute poisoning 
breeding success also declined. - eggs breaking. Wighed and measured eggs to get thickness of the shell
How did you manage to pin it down to internal chemicsty
calcium carbonate - change in supply of this substance to the oviduct. Must have been some impact on the bird's internatl chemistr.
Kestrel affected?
Spararowhawk - similar decline
kesetral less bad, golden eagle. 

all threatedned species. 
recovered in the 3-4 yrs where  dieldrin was not used so much 
golden eagles was more sucessful young. 

dissection / examination of bird - to esablish pesticides . Quantified. experiements - Jap quail and mallard established a clear 

can hear bones being broken during dissection on wooden desk. removing internatl rogans to be put in jar - liver - grownd up with glas - prep for filtration fas liquid chromatograph. Can detect traces of a mnillionth of a millionth of a gram but you need an expensive machine to do it. Numbers of electrons fdefleted form an electric current by the moliecule. 

Director Dr Mellanby - interviewd at desk 
organophosphates breakdown very quickly so they don't have any long term effect. 
DDT breaks down into DDE its still persistent mits still a pesticide. Long persisting subs which don't breakdown int oharmless ones. 

Industry spokes people say persistence is not a bad thing. Very good thing if you're spraying a hut against malaria. But it also gets int the body it remains there aswell. 
Target to lenghteh of season where pest is active. 

Unthinkable. political dynamite
elphantiasise
seleeping sickness
river blindness

look around for somonbody to blame - farmers demanded DDT, safer for human operator than organiphos that would be less dangerous to birds. 

Bill Williams - chairman of ... 
Wilson report - no evidence where persistence of DDT or organochlorine has caused harm to man or animal. 
we don't deny anything without reasonalbe evicence. We haven't yet got all the facts. 
Were all human too, we have wives, kids, cats, dogs, mice. We don't want to harm them any more than you. 

Tremenous increas in technical research. 
Peseticide ind grown in last 30 years. Derris and ncotine are safery than thouse we have now, derris is instant death to fish wheaese they can tolerate it. The concentrate it in their gills. 10 000 times the amount of organochlorine. Animals at the end of the food chain that suffer. Penguisn .

Meat eating man, even vegetarians [images of people walkign iwth children or pushing brams.]
human milk can contain levels dangerous to infants - several american hospitals forbid mothers to breastfeed their babies. 

following birds plants and animals, not only be prof scientists but amateur ornithologist snad other people follow subtle changes that we can suspect that chemical

accidentally get into the env - PCBS we just don't know how they got there. 
May have got into env from garbage, burnt. 1% of rubbish. In 10yrs 6%. 

bodies of sea birds 1969 unexpectedly high residues of PCB. 
didn't realise it was PCB that they were findig - weren't looking for it, couldnt recognise characterisetic signature. 
Only find something if you know to look for it. Only found PCB because its similar to DDT, but suppose it wasn't? Would we ever have found it? We could be polluting the planet with some chemical we don't know about or even thought of. 

We don't know where it is or what its doing. 
hard corals - attacked by crown of thorns giant starfish - one theory that natural predator of this starfish larvaie has been wiped out by DDT. aybe, maybe not, can't be ruled out becase our ignorance about the effect of modern chems on the food chain is so great. 

Organochlorine pesticies = prob acted suffiecntly quickly 
probably to save us frm any long term effects. 
just don't know about PCB
Unknown substances is very difficult - only discover these when they've done some damage. 


Household chemicals not mentioned at all, save the DDT being sprayed aroudn malaria infected homes. 
producer
brenda horsfield. 


