Pesticides and Posterity 
Horizon
30/05/64

Black and white
narration very typical of the time, very RP, 

locusts
insects must eat. Film of locust plague. 
Aircraft
once in the air the only way to kill them is to spray them - it took a week to spray this swarm. Locusts splattering on wind shield 

£200million worth used in our constant battle against our natural enemies

how seriously are these poisoning our environment. What are the impt criteria for the survival of our own species?  [dying locusts]

insects out number us by many millions , nearly a 3rd of all the food in the world is taken by these voracious creatures
£10billion sterling of our food every year
More deadly are the vectors of disease, the tsetse fly, the simulian fly, the curascene mosquito and malaria by the anopholene mosquito responsible for 1 dealth ver y 10 secnds.
[same footage of sleeping sickness, river blindness, elephantiasis  as is used in]

[images of people spraying trees, no obvious protective gear, areial spraying]
In efforts to stem disease and hunger
some quickly disappear, other like ddt perersist in the soil for years. 
images of dead birds, piles of. 
Ecologist is far behind, we don't even know how many different creatures live in the familiar english hedgerows. [- sampling.] Ecologists at the Nature Conservancy near Huntingdon have already foun several 100 insects and are still lookign. Biological community, of which man is a part, is exceedingly complext. All these creatures hav etheir natural enemies. 

One insect can control another. 
late Rachel Carson - biological control photos of RC - our only chance to reach the preservation of earlth

6 govt ienq into danger of pestii. only last months govt  Restircted use of aldrin dieldrin and heptachlor

The cook Committee  - 

great deal of public emotion - showsimages of newspaper headlines
complex
economic, social and aesthetic values are often in conflict

2 men w differing opinon give their personal views 
research director for pesticide mfcr (unnamed)
ecologist - Dr Frank Fraseer Darling conservation foundation- [18th Century house, plus fours, peacocks, country house, RollsRoyce.] Ecologist ses things in terms of complexities, causes and consequences. chem ind sould have done more reserach on consequences. Here's something that kills quickly,didn't ask themselves what happens to the rest of the env., which is what the ecologist would have done. Don't feel that the chem ind can be blamed for what happened to the birds, just one of those things that happens, it teaches us, we learn from occasions like this. Think they should have stopped then, and got back to the question, how can we get over this, but they didn't. 

[thick hedgerows when driving down counrty road]

Indiscriminate bombing - ethicl question - starte against ib, by the end of the war we'd got over it. Are we right to spray the whole biological community to knock out of one or two injurious insects. 

Rachel Carson's influence has been very great, felt very deeply that the chem ind going too far w pesticids - it is an emotional book because it arouses the emotions but it has a basis in well gathered facts and I'm sorry to say are half truths as well because she was going through the scietntific literature for material to prove her feelings. I feel this is what the chem ind does when its advertiseing, the give you half truths. Quote a great deal of perfectly sound sci lit and tells you a  story that arouses your emotions use chemical pesticides. As I see it RC beat thse boys at their own game. She did it quietly, insignificant little woman. I personally feel v cowardly.  I would not have liked to have written that book, but I'm very glad its been written.

[incredibly quiet, just natural noises, cuckoos. walking thoguhg woodland, fields. ]
[Direct to camera]
Technical ability is so great now. Could change env so quickly, much quicker than we could adapt. microscopic animals and plants doing jobs we don't fully understand yet. If we loose them , that is aloss from the biological community which they and ourselves are part. Science tends to create its own problems. 
[show fields, him walking through coppice]
Efficient to have a large area, to grow it three years in sucession, then we create the problem of insect est, drastic means of getting on top o fthem. Barley on chalk and flints - would never think of farming it year after year. now iwth potash you can, very profitable crop. Scientists will always tell you they can produce the food for the gowing number of people. I think they will, great respect for their cleverness... Everybody needs wilderness in their lives. Symptoms of stress in modern life are those of not haveing wilderness available for sufficent number of people.  Coppice, just ash and elm, used by man for 100s years, buffer against over specialiseation, sactuary for many plants and animlas, a sacntuary against the spread of pesticides over the whole contry, which saves England. 

Rooks in trees. watches them

Insignificant, easy to forget them, when spraying. If I were farming today I would certainly use pesticides if the ocassion arose for me to use them. But the principle on which Id go is Minimise use of powerful tool. 
Wait until plague blows over, it will certainly pass or alter husbandry to circumvent. 

looking at caterpillars on bushes

Not completely for bio control of insects
Man is the greastest potential pest on the face of the earth. - something that you wouldn't get rid of in a year or two.
Nuclear explosion in air we can create fallout over an imense area of the world. 
All part of our pestilential quality. Use pesticides as last resouce, not the normal means of carrying on. 
-------
A man on the recieving end of much of the criticism of chemical pesticides is the  
Director of reserach for a large

Dr Eric Edson - unnamed chem company
[starts speech at desk, reading from notes but looking up and twiddling pencil, then cuts away to him standing in the chem plant, various goggled people doing things with  chem vats and equp.t . ]
"Much of the fuss about peseticides these days I think arises from the modern malady of chemophobia. This seems to lead everyone to suspect that the sprayers and the chemists who devise or use these chems are careless, uneducated, negligent or even willful poisoners. One f the problems is that
nobobdy loves a poisoner. Difficult to persuade people that the people who make or use theses chemicals aren't willful poisoners, they're clever, concietntious and selective poisoners in the service of mankind. Nobody loves a poisoner, no matter how you redifine the term. 
[he wears a suit, not a white lab coat when he's looking at the chemical plant, or looking over the shoulder of other scientists]
Medical man, working on chemical risks to man for past 20_ years. chem defence, atomic energy and pesticides since 1952. The new chems produced here, there are very many of them, can't all be guaranteed to be safe chemicals any more than a new pharmacuetical drug or household cleanser could be regarded completely safe. One of our biggest problems is to decide under what conditions a chemical could be regarded as completely safe. I bet my bottom dollar that someone is going to misuse it so much that even the safest chemical is goign to cause trouble somewhere, sometime. This is just one of those facts of life I'm afraid, and we make these chemicals in the realisation that  all along the line there are certain inevitable risks that *the community* have just got to face up to.
drives a less fancy car 0 zodiac
Describes research process, emphasising people, teams, expense, frustrating, knowledge, literature, the sort of requirements necessary for new products. caapable of several puspose.  Very efficient, safe to handle, safe from the point of view of residues left on food, not harmful to livestock as long as simple precautions are follow, not damage the crop nor any other crops which may follow on the same piece of land. Nice balance between not too persistent and persistent enough. Practical aspects - must not cheap to make, otherwise farmers cannot avail themselves of it. Must be suitable for spraying through their own euqpt. Must have several uses, not just one, avoid confusion about which pesticide for which purpose. 10 or 100times as many pesticides as now, very limited type of market, so naturally looking for multiple uses. Very demanding. and may account for why Occasionaly mistakes do arise. There are some chems that already come close to these. 
Control one type of vegetateion within another type a minor mirical I find fascinating. A certain number of mistakes have been made. The most recent have been in relation to aldrin and dieldrin.

Lots of walkign throgh greenhouses and labs, 

decided by the govt aldrin that it is more persistnet than throught. restricutions so that teh human population and the wildlife population have reduced exposure. No scientist would have been willing to predict that the substance would have been half as persistent in the soil as it turned out to be.
[no gloves, no goggles when spraying test sample.]

going through files, 3-4 years work =  looking at reports which cover dietry feeding reseraults rats, warned us of factors in mfc to protect workmen, not a producer of tumour, good analytical method, residues left on end crop based on dietry feeding results  etc,
all we can do with this type of reserach is assess the properties of the material, we have to wait until the material is out in the field for 2-3 yrs befoe we can have  true and valid assement of its total results from a wider circle of use by farmers and by gardeners. 
What factors of saftey have I really got *in hand* on this- some are veg, on special diets, some people are old people, youngsters want special kinds of foods. One has to draw disintinction which might be harmful and concentrations whicch are detectable but which are not causing any damage. Here is the biggest diffiulty of all - when is the residue of no harmful significance
Now, if we knwe this we'd be very well on in the field. 

seems to end abruptly - was there an actual end...  No, Tim Boon says that this was one with a studio discussion afterwards and he has the transcript of it. 

or did I miss something....

no credits

but Horizon
BB TV Science and Features logo shown

various quiet inustrial noises = humming, bubbling in labs, no alarms, or shouting. 

Think this is quite balanced - about equal time, both seem reasonalbe, although the first was a little bit dippy and generally upper class with his Rolls. Maybe the scientist comes accross better? 