Proof of the pudding
brass tacks 04/10/88

Elizabeth Holes - important not so much for me, but children and grandculdren
accumulating  pile of trouble for them. 
give examples of things in my own lifetime that haven't showed up.

can there really be no hazard to our health?

mixing up pesticide in a bucket with a stick.

British Agro Chemicals Association
Leeds University - haen't een tested and evaluated, Ministry Ag assumes when something has been around a long time its safe. That's not the case at all. 

Supermarket - opportunity to picka dn choose. 
supermarkets have to guess what consumers want next and noticing some years ago that we tend to leave assurance on the shelf, the supermarkets realised that we would nt be wanting pesticides in our food and began to check themselves. 


Commissioned reserach projects - TESCO to characterise pesticide levels on incoming goods. Then worked with growers to improve, lower residues. 
Less pesticide equals profit a lesson learned and Tesco greener all the time. 

Stands infront of shelves of airfresheners with a basket of examples
Ozon friendly logo on the can
non pvc clingfilm
no salt
10%less fat
biodeg packaging
hormone testing for meat
salesmen know we'll pay now for peace of mind

superstores can't aford to move ahead of public. 

People have complained about fungicides of lemons. Tesco have been working on a project that monitors and ensures levels are acceptable. 
*pulls up box to show that it has a stamp saying treated* do you not think you should put a notice up to let people know? No, I ahven't seen the need to.  Produce has at some stage has been treated, except thsoe in the organic section. I don't have n'y problem with it. I'm flesh and blod. I have two young childen and I'm happy to feed them this produce. I'm not the sort of person to go home with a double standard. 

 Smaller traders
 Germany - 
 tatty lemons  - shiny lemons have sign telling you not to eat skins. We be told in the UK. Carried out research and found there were a lot of 
 
 veil of secrecy, despicable. 
 impossible to test the millions of produce we get through
 technically illeagal
 
 Showing in a nanalytical lab - male scientist , lots of flasks
 Each type of pesticide needs a different type of test, scientist must guess the test to use, guess wrong and he'll find nothing. 
 shows mass spec read out - not mention the machine. 
 Testing for toxic chems is laborious and expensive. Only a handful of labs in britain have the eqpt or expertise. From the small number of tests it believes it can take an educated guess about the risks we run. 
 [computers, consulting printouts and logbooks]
 
 Elizabeth holes - no nonsese grandmother, low slung bra, flowery dress, interviewd in her kitchen, used to be a scientist - fungcicde on citrus - thought it should be labelled. Buy or not, how to use them. 
 Labelling might suggest to the consumer a hazard exists where none exists and cuases unnecessary alarm
 home food science unit established that scrubbing the ctirus fruits ith water and fiary liquid would remove the wax an the pesticides and preservatives impregnated in the wax would largely be removed. Wrote back and asked them would they prefer their lemon merangue pie flavoured with detergent, or their orange cake flavoured with detergent or their grapefruit sorbets.
 
 Brit Ag Chem assoc feels that MAFF should expalin itself and reassure public, BrtiAgChem deals with the farmers. 
 
 Memories of wartime shortages  used to shelter everyone. 
 Poorer now survival mya depend on saying what the public wants to hear. 
 James Lambe farmer - Consumers concerns and fears turn out some years later to be justified. 
 Story of nitrates. Who would have thought nitrogen applied to crops would be getting into 
 subsidy sstem encourages max use, including using sprays. At the same time we are producing surpluses of food.
 
 With traditional farming back in fasion, chemicals fall of grace has spilled over to the Ministry (of Ag) whitehall whispers, future in doubt. Relys on outside specialists
 eg Prfo Colin Berry
 prevent things might be damanging - fungi growing in food. Wrong to be worried about the fungicide when it might be necessary to prevent something worse. 
 Not appear on a lemon in any quantity that would endanger. If the lemon were to be used in a gin and tonic, the risk from the alcohol would be much higher.
 
 
 
Secrecy, closed system. Message from MAFF is that they are safe if used according to the instructions. 
US EPA send any citizen a heft tome of studies, MAFF send a one page letter saying they're in charge and not to woarry. 

distrurbinb pattern building up
a substance is approved for use then scientists have secont doubts  and the Ministry bans the prouct. 
Pesticides profitted becuase the Min was behind them. Accused of complacency. Thinking about long term affects in
Min does very little in way of testing, testing done by pest mfcrs themselves then Min decides on the basis of reports submitted about whether its safe.
Can only assess acute poisioning, doesn't test, can't test long term effects of pesticides. Rats, mice don't live long enough and aren't quite the same thing. 

Many Drs smiled at lay people's worries
John Inman - GP
still subject to rest of world, rest of nature, substances highly active on biological systems, Treated with respect, assume hazardous until otherwise. Was surprised at support from other doctors and BMA investigation went ahead. Amenable to logical argument - we really don't know. Scientific establishment is breaking ranks. How much evidence you get in a lab like this on 

precautionary principle. products banned as soon as warning signs appear. Mfcr bears the burden he pays the cost. 
Older pesticides are withdrawn becasue of new toxicological data, in animals, we don't wait for a human problem before 

70% do not leave a residue. Such a tiny residue its inconcievable that there would be a human effect. 

Ministry relys on lab work - Slough ADAS MAFF
Alastair Hay, chem pathologist Leeds Uni = all very well if you're only lookinga t a single chemical. 
Make the chemical prove itself. 
Very difficult to get complete accurcy about exposure to pesticie. Have to look at differnt level of proof. [showing mechanised auto sampler. picking out of samples) and log books. 

Uni Sussex - 
Scientific process takes a long time. A lot of info is confiential, so not availab efor discussion even between sci so not exposed to discussion. If public to look and ask the nairve qs that scientists findi t difficult ot ask we could move on a lot faster. 

Freedom of Infrmation Act - USA UK not have this, info is secret. If civil servant would be guildty f a crime against offical secrets act. 

Common Marekt
only one man on duty checking food. 
in many ways we're goign backwards. 
African produce cocktail of substances banned in the west

Interested in general quality of all imported food - fruit and veg is one that looks after itself. Concentrate on high protein products. only so many hours in the day. Presence of pesticides - not simple tests, 10days to fortnight. General screening, compound followed through £1000 for one sample and what's happened to the product? It's been consumed. 

shops observe pulse of mass opinion at the checkouts. if the super stores change their approach its a sign we've changed our minds. 

Elizabeth Holes
I don't want reassurance. I want facts and I want action. Got neither. Not so far. [Dealing with the ministry is like] Pushing a bus uphill with the brakes on. 

Lots of standard imagaery of shopping, ports, labs, fields, nothing outstandingly emotive, not as hard hitting as the cloudburst one where each other interviewee has something seriously against the previous one to say. 


 
 parathion