What's the use of chemicals
Worldwise Reports
Channel 4
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/archon/searches/locresult_details.asp?LR=3146 - Channel 4 archives are under development and not open to the public yet.

http://ftvdb.bfi.org.uk/sift/series/16058  - not having much luck on finding any copies of the Worldwise newspaper though, unless its the WWF one? 

series editor John Edginton
Series Producer J Edward  Milner
An Acacia Production in Association with Otmoor Productions for Ch Four. 
MXMLXXXVI

Environmental problems come in all shapes and sizes, Worldwise reports takes a look at them and the activity to resolve them in Britain and around the world

cartoon hegehog, jazzzy music
spines to grass, pine trees, logs/timber, plane, mountain, city scape, headlights over hedgehog   [cartoon hedgehog makes me wonder who this programme is for]

Chemical works at night 
Huddersfield, ICI make paraquat
Our chemical future 1 - making pesticides
Big employer, secure future of chemical, selling well, secure future of jobs and site
Dr Bryan Smith - middle aged white man, northern accent black suit, shirt and tie. 
standing in front of big poster - Think Safety Life is meant for living 

group of people walking on hills, looking over the chemical plant Dick carries a folder/clipboard. The Paraquat committee was formed very quickly in response to a planning application from ICI Huddersfield - draws together comunity interests. 

Dick Stow youngish white man- Paraquat Action Group - plan was announced in the press to start with and the pressed seemed to deal with it as a controverial issue from the beginning, public response snowballed from it
Kirkeaden ? - Packed out public meeting, action commitee formed that night. Clear that there was a strong public feeling. 

We are concerned about all the fumes that are already coming out, paraquat goign to add to that, we're already worried about the existing pollution, particularly the nitrogen dioxide, the yellow smoke coming from there, we've been trying to get it monitored for years.
 [views of chimney and yellow smoke surrounded by plant, houses and hills in the background]

Bert Thornton (also on hill with the Paraquat Action Group, white, middle aged wearing suit, carrying file to quote from] - reported evidence (news stories) of what I would call major accidents - chemical leaks, fires, eg cyclohexylamine . "A fire and an explosion in accident proof premises" which to me is just ridiculous, nothing should have gone wrong, it cost thousands and thousands of pounds to ICI. There are more, riverpollution [ICI leak turns river green, dyestuff, giant ICI complex, monitiorying the Colne and the Calder to see whether the polln had affected fish life and users of river water. Acid drops, spots on cars, these have been reported in our local evening paper and in some instances the national papers. 

Mayor of Kirklees Borough - Charles Walker - can't do anything about what happens on site, thats the HSE
Dr Ian Wrightson HSE - information is privy to ourselves. (droopy eyed man, hunched shoulders) bound to not disclose information without permission from companyes. Only exception is if legal proceedings were tkaen

Phootgraphs, pinning up, crouching on floor, holding stack of notes, talkinga bout dates photos taken etc. 
Alan and Sylvia Anscombe have been photogrphaing and monitoring emissions from the whole plant for 20 years. They have not been reassured by what they've heard. Also have doubts about attitdues of official bodies, even local council, concerning the process of keeping the public properly informed. 
"Distinctly remember Dr Bryan on radio Leeds saying that there would be no vapours coming out of the plant at all. either from the stacks or any of the vents and so did Dr Rightson said the said."  Do you have reason to doubt that?
Oh yes, We're read the consultants report we've got all the details... ammonia emmissions, and others as well Every time they start a batch there'll be 15 k.g.s of methyl chloride in 20 minutes. Air pollution isn't measured in kilogrames its measured in micrograms. Now this is an awful lot of methyl chloride. We're wondering how many batches are going to start up each year. 

HSE chap Rightson - The stack final safety measure - not routine - only if failure of safety devices - not routine, not planned, hopefully that chimnye never uesed. Specifically designed to disperse emmmissions.  

interviewer - One of the problems that some people have raised is that since the facotry is in a valley 200 feet from the ground at that poins is actually level with several schools in the area - [absolutely unreadable body language/ facial expression- but then looked up to the left and terminated the interview] - I think we better cut there, I can't answer that question, that's purely an industrial air pollution matter  

IndAirPolln - investigations are continuing into the planned stack 

Mayor - We have a right to protect the public of Kirklees - planning application has been refused before, they've gone to the dept of environment, won the appeal and we can't put any conditions whatsoever, so therefore the public could be at risk.

Would rather take decisions themselves, then can put conditions for the area. 

Don't intend to have accidents. Experts in the field have confirmed that the plantwill be fundamentally safe. Cooperate closely with emergency services in the huddersfield area so if something ever did go wrong, which we ont'd think it ever will, there are the means to take care of the situation [nods]

Pesticide use in Herfordshire
shows sensible looking older middled aged white haired white woman cycling in trousers and warm jacket down a countyr road, explaining that she remembered milkmaids and butter cups, daises, celandines,
They've not only had the hedges out, they've filled the ditches. There's very little, dead grass, cow parsley, nettles, deadnettles, certainly no celandine. It all looked so green, its decdptive. It's green unpleasant land. 
Weeds are simply wild flowers growing in the wrong place. 
They have planted a few trees to replace the hedgerows [sparsely planted white plastic covered spindly sticks] 
library Herfordshire flora - researched in 1960s, spot map references, flowers I thought were common, were so. 
then I bought a common wildflower book and went for a look. 

They've sprayed right up to the fence. 
Dreadful pressure, economic pressure on farmers, but really do think they might spare a thought for what they're doing over the long term. Tried to find out what was going on in detail in the ways of sprays so I contacted 

White haired bespectacle man in beige shirt and beige vest pullover, sitting with plant samples on desk in front an dbehind. at Mr Proctor at Min Ag in Cambridge. 

6 to 8 chems applied. 
seems a bit overkill, why do they have to do it so many times
To get the best use out of the product, make the maximum profit out of their jobs like all of us are encouraged to do, but other places like orchards use a lot more. 
(Very smiley, a bit practiced, maybe a bit condescending )

everything looks dead when wheat is ripe, do they spray somethign on the?
The reason no other green thing is there good weed killers and growing techniques the wheat has been so good and competitive with everythign that its smothered everthing else out we havne't killed absolutely everything. IF theres a lack of variety its because the crops are so good. 

What laws govern the use of pesticides
A whole range of laws [less smiley] no obvious easy law against accidents and drift could be an accident. 

Do you think the pressure of the system makes farmers use more than they really need
Natural inclination of people to be perfectionists and not to have a single weed, this is natural in all aof us to be neat and tidy. Public has to decide.... if it means that the farmers would get less we would have to compensate....

Nature Conservancy report - continuinty for wild flowers  - in 10 years time it will be too late
From what i've seen in this district, we're rapidly running out of time

hedgehog moive

John Porrit
Videos
BNFL
CEGB - blameless acid rain
May & Baker on the use of pesticides to control environmental vegetation, with no less a person as Frank Bough as presenter [?   credits point out tha the is under exclusive broadcast contract to BBC]

crowded country
co exist
without destroying the country side surrounding him
green belts, smokeless zones, not enough on thier own
without proper control the vegetation would become unsightly and unsafe [car at a busy junction - desribing danger of country road drivers and pedestrians at the hands of thoughtless litter bugs]
man cannot live withing an unchecked envrinoment. If it takes control [shows derelict building that plants are taking back] it destroys our ability to co exist. [ominous music]Control does not mean destruction, it preserves the best of nature. [shows lots of different kinds of sparays]

back to studio seated, tweed suited, JP who tells us direct to camera it's pretty dire, not impartial, claims to give true picture of env chemicals, a claim that becomes increasingly threadbare as one choc box images gives way to another  [cynical look]

Claimed to help ratepayers, cost effective crops up a lot. Give rate payers what they want.
point out that conservationist are rate payers too. 
R&D 
Telfords cheif Architect  says that herbicides help to provide a green environment, we all use chemicals, they're part of the natural world, all around us. 
So they are, but he neglects to mention that many ofthem are extremely hazardous
that's the way the whole film is angled
Dr Humphries, manageing director reveals what they're really up to, we have to sell the good aspects of chemicals, convince the public that products are intrinsicly safe. 
IS? neglects to mention that some of M&B's products contain carcinogens and teratorgens. UN has a list of products whos consumption or sale has been banned or restricted. Of M&B's 72 different forumuations 15 contain ingredients on that list. 

Many people, the hardlines, say economics pay no part in the preservation of the uniqu

Farmers having to pay the real costs of being caught on the pesticides treadmill. 

Is Frank a nature lover ? He appears to up root some red bartsia growing  in a recently sprayed verge, he maybe in serious trouble unless he had the permission of the land owner. He committed a criminal offence, Coutnry side and wildlife act 1981 . Pity our wild flowers. 


Judy Abel and Frances Berrigan
Sitting in different stuido with greenish  background - Worldwise reports 
concentrating on chems and raising a few questions
many chmes are useful and a few essential ,  but problems when they get in thr wrong place, liek the atmospher, in rivers or onto peoples skin
almost 30% ICI's peseticides  got ot 3rd world, where env regs are less strict, less control over use
Paraquat registered poison in UK but freely avilalbe to those in Malasia. 
FoE Malaysia survey
photos of people without protection using chemicals

Pesticides Action Network  - would like to hear of incidents anywhere in the world, call us at the en of the programme and we'll give you the details. 


Ag Workers Union - lack of info about persistence of chems in the soil . HSE to monitor use of chems more closeley. Norolk lobbied parliament to get complete ban on areial sparying

most sucesful cmapighn 245-T  - linked to serious illness, birth deformities. Local councils and emplowers have benned its use. US EPA 
Can still get weedkiller containing 245 T in hardware shops - SBK brushwood killer (saw this in another programe)
Old version not withdrawn and don't think it should be. Read the formula before you buy. 

chems available in britain but banned in other parts of the world. 

River pollution, seeping out ,

As many as 1/5th popn suffer from chronic allergies because of eposure to toxic chemicals in the atmostphere 
one group in coventy contacted us 0 Incinderator - burn waste, are incinerators safe? Whitely waste reduction unit - rubbish burned, unsorted. heat sold to car factory next door. 
local people complaining, say itpollution the atmosphere. Filter system claimed to be 97% efficient, 4yrs ago that sulphur dioxide and hydrogen chloride produced when the rubbish is burned could exceed ssafety levesl. Added more filter, taller chimney, spread further. Eye and lung problems. 80% locals wanted it lcosed down or cleaned up. Scientists are supposed to be looking at ways of cleanign it up. Wondering whats dropping on them and when its goign to stop. Runcorn chesthire claime theyr' being exposed to dioxin from their incinerator. Edinburg persuade theirs to be shut down all together. 

If you come accross a propblem with chemicals in your environment there are a number of organisations who would like to hear from you 
are all in the Worldwise newspaper. 
Box 4000 W3 6XJ