Poisonings
 The Times (London, England), Saturday, Jan 18, 1930; pg. 9; Issue 45414
Article about series of poisonings using arsenic in Hungary. End of article it mentions that the posion was derrived from flypapers and mixed into food and drink.

The Times (London, England), Thursday, Jan 09, 1930; pg. 7; Issue 45406
Drugs from automatic machines - statement from Pharmaceutical Society of GB - Morton Parry preseident Usual argument that drugs should be dispensed by someone that can advise the user. Interesting to see that they say potassium permanganate can be obtained from a coin operated vending machine. 
 
 Poisons From Automatic Machines.
    The Times (London, England), Tuesday, Apr 22, 1930; pg. 14; Issue 45493
    New and important point arising out of the PPA 1908 undesirable that pulic hould have access to all manner of poisoins without the intervention of a qualified chemist. In the case of some poisongs the common sense of the public might be tursted but as a matter of princpe it was thought poroper to ask for a rulein as to whether or not the sale of poisons from these machines was lawful. 
    On anuary 14 and 28 bottles of lysol bearing Watkinson’s name and address and a statement to the effect that they contained 50% cresol and labelled Poison were bought from an automatic machine outside Watkinson’s shop. 
 	The use of these machines is enormously extensive. 
 	
Poisons From Automatic Machnes.
    The Times (London, England), Friday, Jun 27, 1930; pg. 5; Issue 45550
    Friendly test case  - machine is not a qualified chemist, so found in favour of the Pharmaceutical Society. Any child tall enough to place the oin in the slot and take a bottle of lysol could do so without the knowledge of the defendant or any person in his employment. Beyond all question this ought not to be allowed to continue. The bottled contained over 47%homologues of carbolic acid, a very danderous poison. No supervision had been exercised over the sale of the poison. The sale of such a dangerous poison as lysol certainly ough to be part of the business of a chemist and druggist rather than any other trader. 
     	 	
 Woman's Death From Poison.
    The Times (London, England), Saturday, Feb 15, 1930; pg. 9; Issue 45438.
Suicide - cyanide of potassium from wasp poison 

Evil as a School Subject.
    The Times (London, England), Saturday, Feb 22, 1930; pg. 13; Issue 45444.
  The College in Florida arranged for a class in evil to be studied under the guidance of a coman novelists. The past and present canot be understood without some knowledge of evil ... it makes all stock school subjects so much more interesting...The scientists also find an invluable aide to making chemistry and physics attrictive to the young in the part that poison plays in crime and the laws of physica nd mechanics in the buiness of contriving catastrophes for other people. 
  
  
  Cambridge Undergraduate's Death.
    The Times (London, England), Thursday, Mar 06, 1930; pg. 19; Issue 45454.
  ... examined the stomach he detected the typical smell of prussic acd. Systematic search of the stomach revealed the presence of cyanide of potassium and a small amount of strychnine. ... quite easy for a student of chemistry to obtain the poison from the chemical laboratory.
 
  Cornish Arsenic Case.
    The Times (London, England), Tuesday, Nov 25, 1930; pg. 9; Issue 45679 
  The weedkiller was described as practiaclly all arsenic. All arsenic suppied by chemist must be coloured according to the Poisons Act. Some was coloured with oot and some with indigo. that coloured with soot showed a greyish colour and that with indigo a blue colour. 
  
 Students Ejected By Police.
    The Times (London, England), Wednesday, Dec 10, 1930; pg. 7; Issue 43692. 
  Live eels and sink bombs were thrown at th eCentral Hal last night wen anumber of Uni stuents were ejected by the police during a protest meeting agains poison gas expts on animals. As an organised row it was a complete failure. Meeting was called to proetst agains the poison gas expts on animals at the govt chemical warefare station. Commader Kenworthy said that he propposed to intoduce into oparliament shortly a bill which would prevent the expenditure of public money on these experiments. 
  
  Phosphorus Paste Given To Invalid Sister.
    The Times (London, England), Friday, Apr 17, 1931; pg. 16; Issue 45799.
  No note on where paste was obtained, what paste is usually used for
  
  Spraying Fruit Trees.
FROM A CORRESPONDENT.
The Times (London, England), Monday, Apr 20, 1931; pg. 20; Issue 45801.
 lime-sulphur is made by boiling lime and culphur for a certain length of tim ebut supplies can be readily purchased from stores and horticultural sundriesmen at relatively low prices and thse only need dilution with water to be made a suitable spray. The spray fluid will be yellow in colour. Where trees have been muh attacked by caterpillars, it is advisable to mie the lime sulphur with a certain qunatit o lead arsenate to act as a prelcial poison for these pests. 4lb lead arsenate to 100 gallons on lime sulphur spray makes a safe and effective sparay...[an industrial orchard/plantation quantity!] Colour beomes chocolate coloured.... The lead arsenate paste for fuit tree sparys is also stocked by leading chemists. 


Chemist knew Lewis who was a regular customer “On April 14 he purchased a tin of Eureka weed killer and 2.5 oz cyanide of potassium, signed the poison book for both purchase. He said that the weed killer was for destroying weeds in the garden path and the cycanide was as an insecticide. 

Garden Notes. Phonomena of a belated summer
FROM A CORRESPONDENT.
    The Times (London, England), Saturday, Jul 04, 1931; pg. 15; Issue 45866.
... modern gardening fashions with rock garden sand stone pavements provide the slugs with the diurnal hiding places necessary for thie exitence.. Slug infested ground - solution of aluminum sulphate and lime of the strength of 1lb of sulphate to 5 gallons of a satuated solution of limein water easily made by dissolving 0.5 lb quicklime in 4 gallons of water. When the natural heat has colle, the clear lime solution is poured into a gallon of water in which 1b of aluminium sulphate has been disosolved, the lime sediemtn being discarded. After the mixture has been strained, it can be used on the slug tained ground with an ordinary watering can. 
Dispossess ants from the heart ofa precsious plant, easily done by making a slanting hole through the rootes of the plant with a pointed stick and then  pouring a little cargon biulphide int othe hole, quickly plugging up the opening to prevent the espape of the poison gas. The same respect must be paid to a volatile liquied like carbon busulphide as is paid to petrol adn for the same reasons. 


Illegal Sale Of Poison.
    The Times (London, England), Thursday, Aug 13, 1931; pg. 7; Issue 45900.
entered Gillatt’s shop and asked for a poison for a dog. Gillatt advised him to use prussic acid but warned him of the dangerous nature of the poison. The man signed the register with his name but ave a false address. Inteneded to send an assistant home with hime to see that he used the poison on the dog. A fine of £3 and costs or in dafault one month’s imprisonment was imposed. 

The coroner asked Aldous where he bought the cycanide and he replied “at Boots, High Holborn, and signed the book. What did you get it for - to take myself in case of emergency. Why did you divide it in two? - in case one was taken from me, It was known that I had cycnaide in my possession and was was threatened that it would b etaken from me. Who  threatened it? - I think the police at Padington. 

Hove Hairdresser's Death.
    The Times (London, England), Tuesday, Oct 13, 1931; pg. 9; Issue 45952.
    She used to carry cyanide of potassium in her handbag screwed up in paper, and used it to clean her hands after she had been dyeing hair
    
Poison Sold To Child By Mistake.
    The Times (London, England), Tuesday, May 31, 1932; pg. 18; Issue 46147
    Lead acetate sold by chemist by mistake rather than lime water - refill bottle
    
    
    Red Lead In Cocoa.
    The Times (London, England), Friday, Jun 23, 1933; pg. 11; Issue 46478
    Red lead would be used to protect garden seeds from mice said defence solicitor. Had been mixed into cocoa 
    
    Youth's Death In Hut.
    The Times (London, England), Saturday, Aug 05, 1933
    Evans bought the poison and had said it was for gold analysis. Evans gave Whitelegg water from a glass which probably contained the poison. Evnas had two sides to his character. He was a sort of Jekyll and Hyde, a respetable man during the day and a reprobate at night. 
    
    
    Rooks Dying In Dorset.
    The Times (London, England), Thursday, Jan 04, 1934; pg. 7; Issue 46643
    Thousands in flight esp Melcome Horsey area dropping dead from what is believed to be arsenical poisoning. Gathered in sackfuls. Regarded by famers as pests. Feared that other birds might be affected. Does not say in waht form the poison is left in. RSPCA investigating. 
    
    Drugs Used For Slimming.
    The Times (London, England), Thursday, Apr 05, 1934; pg. 7; Issue 46720. 
    rewording of Pharmacy and Poisons Act to include restrictions on drugs used for slimming - Dinitropheons, dinitrocresols preparaions or admixtures containing dinitrophenols, prparations of admixtures containing dinitrocresols. 
    
    Bugs In Houses.
FROM A CORRESPONDENT
    The Times (London, England), Thursday, Aug 02, 1934; pg. 12; Issue 46822. 
    Bedbugs - fumigation with hydrogen cyanide. General cleanliness campaign - soap, water esp with a little soda in it is always effective in preventing a casually introduced insect from establishing itself. inculcation of habits of cleanliness is the primary object. 
    
    L. R. HIBBERT. "Destroying Wasps' Nests." Times [London, England] 7 Aug. 1934
    Cyanide powder to kill wasps - at this seaon of the yeat i invariably carry in my pocket a small bottle of powdered cyanide and an old teaspoon. I ahve on several occasions destoryed nests under tiles in a rof by filling a piece of glass tube with cyanide, attaching a 3ft piece of rubber tube and blowing the powder up uner the tiles. Never had an accident to graing stock, fowls or other animals as I always take care to insert the poison well into the nest. 
    
    "Strychnine In Garden." Times [London, England] 16 Aug. 1934: 7.
    Thornborrow purchased strychninie for rodents and garden pests. Gap in hedge had been wilfully made. Strychnine had been put on pieces of fish because carbolic acid and peper had failed to keep down garden pests. 
    
    "Spirits Of Salts In Tea." Times [London, England] 5 Oct. 1934: 4. 
    Mrs Phillips said she kept spirits of salt for claning purposes in a bottle in a shed. On the Friday when she had occasion to use it she found it was ineffective for cleaning. After taking the bottle to a chemist she told the girl she would have to get another place. Later she noticed that the girl was crying and on being questioned turner admitted that she had put spirits of sals in to the the coffee and tea because she said she wanted to do herself in: . At this stage the girl interposed I did drink some of the tea. 
    
    Sprits of salt is hydrochloric acid
    
    
    Various reports on locust plagues - standard method of control is to spray the infecte area with arsenite of soda = wild birds who are the natural enemy of the locust take the posion and the destroyers are themseves desdroyed. Not yet determinded what is the correct dose of poison  — small enough to kill the locust but no small as not to harm man and beasts."Fighting the Locust." Times [London, England] 5 Dec. 1934: 15. 
    
    "Sale Of Poisons." Times [London, England] 19 June 1935: 11.
    Proposed changes - Home Secretary proposes to make Rules in relation to the Pharmacy and Poisons Act 1933 = Rules shall come into force on May1 1936. Old system, whereby the Council of the Pharmacuetical Scoety had to decide what were and what were not poisons and what ruels should be made for the selling of poisonous substances would be supplanted by the machinery of the Poisons Board and the Home Secretary. A new system of inspction, under which the chemist shop would be inspected by pharmacist inspectors and the shops of unqualiifed sellers of poisons by the inspectors of local authorities. Sale of strychnine would become illeagal if Boards recomendations that they should be sold only as ingredients of medicines were adopted. Arsenical weed killers would only be sold by chemists. One of the objects of theat provision was to encourage the use of non-arsenical weed killers. Also recommended that spirit of salt should in future be sold only by chemists in order to encourage the use of equally effective byt non-toxic preparations in the house. 
    Lysol sold either by chemists or if properly labelled in proper bottles, sold by any trader - decide. Serious accidents in hospitals due to supply and storage of hospital poisons. 
   ... nothing that authorities could do could prevent the accidents which occurred from time to time through the negligence of individuals. The point of reatest danget to the public wa in their homes where the only protection from the risk of accidents with poisons was the exercise of intelligence by the individual citizen. 
   
"Chocolates By Post." Times [London, England] 8 July 1935: 11   
   salts of lemon - bought to treat some clothes and on the spur of the moment put some over some chocolates which she then sent through the post with a rude note to her landlord. 
   Potassium hydrogenoxalate, also known as potassium bioxalate, is a salt with formula KHC2O4 or K+·HO2C-CO2−.   aka potassium hydrogen oxalate, potassium binoxalate, acid potassium oxalate, or monobasic potassium oxalate. In older literature, it was also called sorrel salt, sal acetosella, or (rather improperly) salt of lemon
   
 "Dangerous Chemicals Stolen." Times [London, England] 3 Sept. 1935: 14.  
   Theft of chemicals and equpment from International Chemical Company. All marked poison where necessary and with full name. Possibility that the theieves had knowledge and definite purpose. 
   
   Safeguards Against Poisons." Times [London, England] 8 June 1935: 4. 
   “Many fatalities would be avoided if greater precautions were taken by the public in the keeping of poisons, particularly if it became the accepted practice in every home for article labelled oison or caution to be kept together in one place preferabley under locka and key, away from other articles and out of the reach of children. A liquid poison should never be kept as it so frequently is in an ordinary bottly byt only in the bottle in which it has been bought.”
   establish standard type of poison bottle, fluted vertically when containing liquid poison other than one to be taken internally. 
   Unisuitability of the premises of some traders for the storage of loose poisons 
   arsenical weedkiller has been thepoison empoloyed in several cases of murder both in liquid and poweder forms it requires unusally careful handling if disastrous accidens are to be avoided. 
   Strychnine - not only well known as insturment for murder but frequent poisonings of hounds, domestic animals and wild birds from the negligent laying down on poisoned baits for vermin .
   "
   "Poison Charge." Times [London, England] 16 Jan. 1936: 4.
   girl said she took the mercuric perchloride from a cupboard in te bathroom and put some of the opison into a bottle of whisky and into another bottle containing cocktails and into medicinal paraffin which her mistress was taking. 

"Three Deaths From Sodium Nitrite." Times [London, England] 19 Aug. 1936: 7.    
  Sodium nitrite taken from work and mistaken for ordinary salt. Father was a chemical worker, in Middlesborough. 
  
  "Jam Tarts By Post." Times [London, England] 31 Oct. 1936: 9.
  attempted poisoning - bought rat poison at a chemissts shop, the main ingredient was phosphorus. Two of the six jam tarts were found to have been impregnated underneath the jam with a substance which proved to contain ninetenths of a grain of phosphorus, one eigth of a grain is a fatal does. Exactly the same as the rat poison purchased. 
  
  "Woman's Death From Poison." Times [London, England] 30 Dec. 1936: 15. 
  died 2.5hrs after taking a dose of what she thought to be oil of nutmeg but which was nitro-benzine. Chemists stock bottle examined and consisted entirely of nitrobenzine apart from a smell which seemd oil of nutmeg, bottle originally contained oilt of nutmeg but then filled with nitrobenzine. NB used in perfumes, soaps and boot polish but did not know of any use that a dispensing chemist would have for it. 
  
 "Sale Of Poison." Times [London, England] 12 Mar. 1937: 13. 
 Unqualified chemist believed he could sell tablets as not marked as poison “Do-Do Brand” which contain ephedrine a poison under Schedule 1 of the 1933 Poisons Act. 
  
  A CORRESPONDENT. "Meta As A Slug Killer." Times [London, England] 3 May 1937: 20. 
  Meta rushed to a powder and mixed with bran, turne to account by horticultual sundriesmen who arket the mixture under fancy names. Birds suffer no ill effects from eating the slugs. USe against slugs was accidentally discovereda few years ago by an amateur gardener. 
  
  a Correspondent. "Getting The Better Of Moths." Times [London, England] 8 Apr. 1938: 21. 
  deter moths with naptha, lavender or insecticide paradichlorobenzene. Use paradichlorobenzene as contact poison -spray powder into crevices etc.
  
  "Chocolates That Tasted Bitter." Times [London, England] 22 June 1938: 13.
  potassium permanganate put into chocolates - noticed bitter, was ill. 
  
  "Bank Clerk's Death From Poison." Times [London, England] 11 Aug. 1938: 12. 
  commercial cyanide - resembeled in shape the end of a shaving stick, being about 1in in diameter and 1in high and of a light-cream colour. Mr Wyeth said he recognised it as being commercial potassium cyanide though he had not seen it made up in exactly the same form. He had seen it in somewhat similar form at a Govt laboratory, where he worked until MArche this year. Brother had not done any chemistry in the same way as I have or has not done any as a hobby. Did you bring any away from the Govt lab? No. Witness said he did not know how any ordinary person would get it unless he had access to a chem works or lab. 
  
  "City Murder Charge." Times [London, England] 17 Sept. 1938: 12. 
  Spirits of salt put into whisky, felt burning sensation.
  
   CORRESPONDENT. "The Vegetable Plot." Times [London, England] 6 June 1938: 15. 
  corrosive sublimate is scheduled as a poison. sold in tablets, 4 tablets dissolved in one gallon of water, water the solution soon after planting to garud agains club root and damage by magotts (alternatively puddle the roots in a muddy mixture of lime and soot). 
  
  OUR CORRESPONDENT. "Vienna Murderess Convicted." Times [London, England] 21 May 1938: 16. 
  in each case a form of rat poison so far unknown to the annals of crime in this country appear to have been used. Poison in form of a sulphate paste packing in tubes is known as thallium. Its presence in food or drink attracts no attention because it has neiher taste nor odour. 
  
  
  "A Great English Chemist." Times [London, England] 25 Nov. 1938: 15. 
  Mark centenary of the birth of William Perkin - work given birth not merely to a host of beautiful cloulrs but also to innumerable synthetic drugs, perfumes and other substances that minister to the comfor and conveneience of man - not to mention other like poison gases that do not. 
  
  A CORRESPONDENT. "Field Poisons." Times [London, England] 2 Sept. 1939: 13
  Duck eat lead (pellets) without ill effect - interestin to know whether these birds are wholly immune fro lead poisining. Ducks like other birds are susceptible to the effects of alcohol. Jackdaws steal lead from windows, grouse pick up lead shot, but pheasants can be fatally poisoned by as few as four. Arsenical weedkillers impregnate worms, beetles and grubs as well as the soil have taken their toll on bird ife in many places and in recent years the empoloyment of a certain patent fuel mixed with bran to ill slugs has also brought death to scores of birds. Barn and other owls pick up rats and mice which were dying from poison = fatal. Carbide placed in herrings to deliberately kill gulls and seals, Epping Forest deer killed by eating waste carbide dpositied at the roadside by cyclists.  
  
  Kennel Farm and Aviary Times [London, England] 9 Oct. 1939: 16.
  Wardog - portable cabinet for protection from poison gas for dogs. £3 15s medium size, later on advertised as suitable for cats and other pets. , sold from Harrods, Army and Navy stores, Gamages, Spratts as well as direct from Keats and Co. 
  
  "Poison Gas 'Detector Disks'." Times [London, England] 9 Dec. 1939: 8.
  Special yellow paint known as detector paint may be seen on tops of pillar boxes and on boards in the streets changes colour if a rop of blister gas in liquid form falls on it. These painted surfaces are provided by local authorities as a means of detecting gas spray. Small disks coated with this paint are on sale ina number of shops. These disks are useless for indicating the presence of gas becase they give no reaction to gas vapor and are too small to be a reliable indicator of falling spray. 
  
  A CORRESPONDENT. "Efficient Housekeeping." Times [London, England] 17 June 1940: 9.
  no names of chemical or brands are given in this article - cockroaches, crickts, ants silvver fish and earwigs attacked by poisoned food, by liquid sprays or by powder. It is a strong contact poison and forces insects into the open. Flies seem to dislike the colour blue - advantage to have larger and sculleries distempered in a blue wash. Flypapers, attacked by sprays but in uin gthe liquid ones it is necearry to shut all doors and windows for some time and leave the vapour to do it work. Powder sparye ont oany ledges where the flies congregate wil kill them in a few moment sand remain potent for along time. 
  
  A CORRESPONDENT. "Derris In The Garden." Times [London, England] 17 Aug. 1940: 7.
  history of derris explained, natural product, fresher the better. Use a screw down lidded container to keep freshness. 
  
  A CORRESPONDENT. "Strychnine As A Vermicide." Times [London, England] 3 Sept. 1940: 2.
  ban on strychnine lifted, but a quantity not exceeding 4oz may be supplied to a person producing a written authority issued by a county war agricultural executive committe  importance of food production. 
  
  "Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd." Times [London, England] 22 July 1943: 6
  ICI explains why everyone must put up with lack of fresh paint for personal use = used to protect tanks, detect gas, preseve food etc. 
  
  "Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd." Times [London, England] 25 Nov. 1943: 3. 
  against rats, grey squirrels, rabbits - chemical warefare protects human food supplies. 
  
  "Ici." Times [London, England] 12 May 1944: 2. 
  lime wash and crecylic or caustic soda pplications used to destroy insect eggs as winter wash until British chemist provided a superior article - tar oil distillate. Lead arsenate stomach poison for beetles and caterpillars, nicotine to kill sucking insect liek greenfly, wetting agents to make spray spread easily. Aimed at professional growers of fruit. 
 
  "Powers Of New Insecticide." Times [London, England] 2 Aug. 1944: 2 
  DDT  - several refs have already been made in The Times to the powerful synthetic multipurpose insecticide, further details can now be published. British branch of Geigy brought the compound to the notice of the British Govt in 1942. 
  
  "Woman Sentenced For Manslaughter." Times [London, England] 16 Nov. 1946: 2. 
  Rat poison in dinner - manslaughter not murder. Does not give active ingredient of rat poison. 
  
John Masefield., and Shane Leslie. "The Slaughter Of Rooks." Times [London, England] 6 May 1948: 5. 
  decision to slaughter rooks - like most birds, will at times cause loss to farmers. EAch rook eats perhaps almost his own weight of farmers pests in every month of the year. . Rook population smaller than ever owing to destruction of nesting-tree, adult rooks picked up poison, painfully killed, leaving unhatched eggs and unattended chicks. Rook shooting and rook pie are more popular than any attempt to learn how the rook is of benefit to the farmer. John Masefield, Burcote Brook Abingdon. 
  	Only time that a gun is needed is when corn is stooked. Save shot for rats. Shane Leslie
  	
  	"Insects In Parcels." Times [London, England] 29 Nov. 1949: 2.
  	DDT in packaging material - insect proof because full of holes, labyrinthine cellulose wadding, insect picks up ddt to kill self. Further tests on commercial scale soon by Printing and Allief Trades Reseach Assocn
  	
  	1950 Advert "Rotary Hoes Limited." Times [London, England] 7 July 1950: 7. 
  	“Worried by weeds? to take poison to weeds is supposed to be effective.... to take poison because of weed-worry would be very bad advice, especially now, when every gardener can afford a “Bantam”. This motor digger digs weeds back into the earth and chops them up to form humus. Get rid of weeds, get heary crops - get a Bantam”   Basic price £65
  	
  	"Cyanide Accounted For." Times [London, England] 29 June 1950: 3.
  	Three boys accused of stealing sodium cyanide from a works. 10yrold sent to an approved school, 9 yr old fined £1, and 12 yr conditionally discharged.
  
 OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT. "German Chemicals For Peaceful Uses." Times [London, England] 7 June 1950: 5.
   chemicals discussed in terms of aggressive use - “War explosives, certain rocket fuel chemicals and poison war gases without peace-time application remain under strict control but industial explosies and their accessories, poison war chemicals with peace time application, white phosphorus and chlorine are to be no longer controlled. Permits issued for the manufacture of a large class of war chemicals required for a peace economy, such a s industrial explosives, liquid oxygena dn ammunitio for civial securty and sporting purposes. 
   
  "Poisonous Sprays." Times [London, England] 24 Oct. 1952: 9.
    Uneasiness - safegaurds to protect health of men  - spraying contractors and farmers. Wider considerations - bird casualties 175 in a 46 acre field of brussel sprouts treated for aphys with organic phosphorus insecticide. British Field Sports Society (pheasants, partidges) called a conference to review the problems of new poison sprays. Nature Conservancy no doubt watching closely. Deadly poisonous immediately and maybe for some days afterwards. Dinitro compounds also wiely used, sometimes unnecessarily. Growth hormones are just effective. 
    
 W. VICTOR SMITH. March Wall, Boundary Road, West Kirby, Cheshire. "Toxic Sprays." Times [London, England] 17 Oct. 1952: 7.
       Incident reported in the ICI Game Services pamphlet, The Effect of Farm Chemicals on Game, 175 not whole number as impossible to search the entire field and surounding areas. I am a special constable for the purposes of the Wild Birds Protection Acts and I am now wodnering how I could logically reprimand a boy for, say, shooting one young bird while adjoining fields were being sprayed with poisons likely to kill birds in hundreds. Effect on the the minds of children of such total disregard of wild life may indeed be one of its more serious consequences. One would have thought it not beyond the wit of scientists to device a mechanical bird scarer duign the danger peiod of sparying. 
       
       OUR AGRICULTURAL CORRESPONDENT. "Crop Spraying." Times [London, England] 13 Oct. 1952: 2. 
       Contractors realise imptc - brief doctors so blood tests after exposure can be done without elay. Poisoning can result from tinkering with unwilling tins and from handling material which is difficult to mix. The best pack I know puts the DNC powder in a polythene bag and this in turn in a wooden keg. The bag is emptied straight into the tank and the keg can be burned.
      
        "Widow Accused Of Murder." Times [London, England] 17 May 1952: 3. 
       Death from arsenical poisoning. Mr Roberts was neurotic and worried about himself, hypochondriac.
       Mrs Roberts obtained a tin of weedkiller in powder form which was 50% arsenic from Mr Griffiths chemist at Holyhead. A woman had gone into another chemist’s shop and asked for an arsenical weed killer which had to be ordered. Another chemist Mr PArry ws visited by a lady who asked for weedkiller. When offered a non poisonous type she said she wanted an arsenical kind because it was more effective. Told the woman to call back and was sold a gallon tin of a liquid type 50% arsenic. Signed the poison book Mrs White of White House Talsarnau - no such person or address. Tins were found in the schoolhouse with the names of the chemists, griffiths and PArry marked on them. 
       witness agreed he was interested in conjuring and had at home certain chemical preparations to polish the cards. 
       
       "Widow's Defence In Murder Trial." Times [London, England] 11 July 1952: 3.       Mrs Roberts denied killing her husband or giving him weed killer, which she bought at his request to clear weeds. His stomach trouble began, he thought, when he was in a chemical factory. He thought he had recieved some poison there. He had said he would do away with himself if he did not get well but she did not regard this seriously. 
       
       "Poison In Family's Drinks." Times [London, England] 30 Jan. 1952: 3.
       Potassium bromate into tea in order to get an opportunity to leave the house and meet another man. 
       
       
      Death by yellow phosphorus poisoning - Rodine (was sentenced to death as a result). Various people testifying seemed to have tried eating the rat poison in order to comment on whether you might notice it being put into anything. Symptoms of phosphorus poisoning is violent colic-like pain, raging thirst. 