Draft of a chemical biography /case studyBicarbonate of Soda Sodium bicarbonate is today touted as a cleaning material that our grandmothers used; the fine white crystalline powder is gently abrasive when used as a paste on hard surfaces, it makes an alkaline solution that is not painfully caustic, we see it in toothpaste so assume it must be safe to put in our mouths, it benignly absorbs peculiar smells in the fridge. However, these uses appear to be relatively modern in Britain, as the household manuals, helpful tips in magazines and newspaper articles do not suggest baking soda, sodium bicarbonate or bicarbonate of soda for these uses until the 1970s. If our grandmothers used it they must have told each other about them, rather than writing about it.  Possibly some confusion comes from the use of the term soda, where it usually refers to washing soda. This is the closely related chemical, sodium carbonate which has similar properties of being alkaline, and  can be used for similar cleaning tasks. It generally comes in larger lumps and is not intended for consumption or intimate uses such as face washes or toothpaste. Harold Wilson reminisced about a time when camping with the boy scouts he mistakenly used washing soda instead of baking soda when preparing the cabbage (it was inedible, though some would say that cabbage cooked with baking soda is also inedible – there was much debate about the proper cooking of vegetables during WW2). These names, washing soda and baking soda, indicate their principle uses. Focussing on baking soda, it’s food related uses are thanks to the giving off of carbon dioxide when it reacts with an acid. This means it makes baked goods rise, drinks effervescentIn an American nursing journal, Church & Dwight regularly placed adverts for the medical uses of baking soda. The company promoted their two brands Cow, and Arm & Hammer, which they assured readers were always at hand in the domestic environment. Cleaning baby bottles is the principle non-internal use listed, which implies regular, economical and gentle use, not leaving any harmful or distasteful residue for the baby. Readers are advised to send for a booklet that outlines “The Usefulness of Soda”. Church & Dwight produced a variety of almanacs as well as recipes and household hints in which they encouraged the choice of bicarbonate of soda for various domestic uses. According to the  1950s Church & Dwight focused their efforts on promoting non-food uses of their products, which saw the publication of the Usefulness of Soda booklet. However, it was not the first time that the company had done this. Their 1935 booklet It’s in Knowing How to Use It presented baking, stain removal, garden and garage uses.  [ordered both – expect in Sept] [Check with HAT to see if they have anything on booklets like this advertised in UK – nothing turning up in BL or Bod catalogues]During the Second World War, The Ministry of Food placed newspaper adverts in the form of hints and recipes that referenced kitchen uses of bicarbonate of soda beyond leavening that would help alleviate problems encountered during rationing. This included to reduce the amount of sugar required to sweeten fruits and in cooking dried pulses, an economical and abundant choice of protein. Baking soda was recommended as first aid for stings and burns, exposure to mustard gas, as well as a remedy for indigestion. Medical and beauty uses dominate the newspaper promotions of sodium bicarbonate. Newspapers carried occasional stories about bicarbonate of soda fire extinguishers that contained this substance were remarked on and advertised and in 1965 a large batch fitted to invalid carriages were recalled due to a problem with the bracket (not any thing to do about the efficacy of the system when deployed correctly). Newspaper reports went into a surprising amount of detail when discussing the use of bicarbonate of soda in the production of crack cocaine. Although not a regular domestic use, newspapers reported on the topic as if it were something that anybody could do at home, a new incarnation of kitchen chemistry. apparently fascinated by the juxtaposition of an ordinary domestic substance being implicated in the homemade conversion of old fashioned cocaine into a new dangerous form of drug. The restriction of sodium bicarbonate because of this was not raised in the mainstream media or in parliamentary debate. Trying to control this everyday substance because of a tiny minority of people would have not only been very difficult to do, but would have caused uproar and ridicule. However, this could be compared to citric acid, which although it because of its role in heroin injection was restricted it was a much less commonly used substance, generally obtained from a pharmacy, rather than the grocery shelves and therefore not so much in the public eye. Domestic users of sodium citrate or citric acid were jam makers and home brewers, both wine and beer, where home brewing enthusiasts could go to specialist shops or mail order for supplies. Sodium citrate was suggested in domestic recipes as an alternative to fresh lemon juice, essentially meaning that it was a good substitute when lemons were scarce during WW2 for instance, but the crystalline chemical was generally unnecessary for most home uses.Only three times was it mentioned in The Times in relation to cleaning or to stain removal: once in 1970 in relation to combating a funny smell in defrosted freezers, in a 1978 book review of Victorian clothes cleaning and the other was not a domestic use but in relation to the removal of coal tar waterproofing inside the Statue of Liberty through a specially developed kind of sandblasting, but with bicarbonate. It was also connected with stains left on her face by a leak of the substance through gaps created by the removal of the coal tar. Products are advertised as not containing bicarbonate of soda, which looks like the manufacture seeks to assure the potential consumer that they are buying something different, something more complex than simple baking soda, it has added value. Oral histories might give me some evidence that people used bicarbonate of soda, as perhaps it was so obvious that people just didn’t need to write it down? However, I think that it might have been a more American/Canadian thing. Tooth powder - powdered chalk and other powdered abrasives, not just bicarb, though this is often recommended as simple dentifrice in BMJ. JSTOR searches for baking soda, bicarbonate of soda, sodium bicarbonate cleaning generally pulled up medical washing of afflicted areas, though there was an American Journal of Nursing article that recommended cleaning enamelware with baking soda, and adverts were placed frequently by the Arm and Hammer company, promoting their product as recognised by the Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry of the American Medical Association and listing cleaning baby bottles as one of its uses. NOT CERTAIN THIS HAPPENS IN UK? The 1948 article about cleaning hospital enamelware was written by Lee Seabolt of the Lawrence H Selz Organization, a public relations agency, so we can suppose that they were working on behalf of a firm that produced or supplied this type of equipment, although no brand names are given (or possibly a baking soda firm?). Loblaw, a Canadian firm, repackaged its baking soda and started to donate a penny per box of to Friends of the Earth in 1989. This was reported in The Times newspaper, but no other references to businesses operational in the UK doing anything similar appear in the paper. ¬ Cassell’s Household - bread without yeast - carbonate of soda, teaspoonful of salt. Half a teaspoonful of muriatic acid. Set into the oven at one. Beautiful sweet bread and it is wholesome. Some use tartaric acid, in which case the bread will contain tartrate of soda, which although not poisonous is medicinal, slightly purgative even. On the other hand, muriatic acid neutralises soda just as well as tartaric acid and the resulting compound is only common salt.