Mr Robinson, the dentist, in a communication to the Medical Gazette says:  I have frequnetly applied collodion in severe cases of toothache, arising from exposure of the nerve, with perfect success, when no persuasion could induse the patient to submit to extraction, either with or without the use of chloroform or ether. The method I adopt is to let the patient first wash the mouth with warm water, in which a few grains of bicarbonate of soda have been dissolved. I then remove from the cavity any foreign substnac elikely to cause irritation. After drying the carity, I drop, from a point, the collodion, to which have been added a few grains of morphia; after which, I fill the cavity with asbestos, and saturate with collodion. Lastly, over this I place a pledget of bibulous paper. In a few second the whole becomes solidified and forms and excellent non-conductor of heat and cold to the exposed nerve. By occasionally renewing this, I have been enabled to effect a more durable stopping than with gold. 

The Blackburn Standard (Blackburn, England), Wednesday, January 03, 1849; Issue 728.


can be easily managed by not using yeast at all, but such of its constituents, reaily procured from the next chemist on which its fermenting property depends; and this applicatio of sscience to domestic purposes will, we believe, ere long, become generally acted upon. the formula given is as follows: - Take of flour three pounds avoirdupois; bicarbonate of soda, in powder, four drachms; hydrochloric acid, five fluid drachms; water, about twenty six ounces; common table salt, four drachms. Bread made in these proportions contains mothing but flour, salt and water, for the proportions of soda and hydrochloric acid used are those which chemically combined make common salt. the ingredients should be mixed well together, the soda and flour first which is best done by passing the former through a fine sive, and stirring it wellinto the flour with the hand; the salt shoul be next dissoved and added to the hydrochloric acid (a woden or glass rod being used to mix them); the whole should be then thrown together and kneaded as throoughly and speedily as possible. The dough thus made should be baked in long tins and is suffienct to make two loaves. About one hour and a half is required in baking. The bread is well tasting, lighter and more digestible than bread baked with yeast, as is less accenet. There cannot be a question that the unyeasted bread is more to be depended on for the sick chamber or the use of the dyspeptic, and mus, of course, be more safe and wholesome for the public at large. The Critic. 