Crinolines and Crimping irons
p31
19th Century colour fixing was an issue - lose dye with the dirt. Magazines full of hints to prevent this = a little gall obtainable at the butcher’s shop and stirred ino the wash tub. Or ‘one pennyworth of sugar of lead in a pail full of cold spring water. Put the dress into it and let it remain there one hour. On taking it out wash the dress as usual. I need scarecely remind “Emma W” that sugar of lead is a violent poison and must be carefully used.’ The Queen 1863

not use sugar of lead if they have any scratches abrasions or wounds about their hands. 

p32 ‘if washed at home, one of the ladies of the family should go herself and put in the vitriol; as if trusted to the domestics they may put in too much -in which case the dress will be destroyed by dropping all to pieces. It is well to have neither vitriol, soda nor pearl-ash kept in the kitchen. When necessary to use any of these articles let one of the ladies add them herself as hey are all injurious if employed injudiciously or in too large a qunatity.” ref 27  Miss Leslie’s Magazine 1843


ammonia to fix black materials


p34
benzine or tupentine to clean velvet
benzoin or mixture of borax, sal ammoniac, ammonia dissolved together. [sounds like solid ammonia]
gin as cleaning agent - sensible even after taxation of alcohol, Harrods retailed it at 1/6d a pint. Effectiveness attested by the fact it appears frequently as an ingredient in various cleaning fluids. 

p35 liquid ammonia specified for velvet cleaner - 2 tablespoonfuls of lq ammonia and two of warm water. 

p36 to fix glossy parts of silk caused by friction - spirit, such as eau de Cologne, ammonia, gin etc (ref 52 - The Queen 1863)

reviving - sponge with nearly a dry sponge dipped in a misture of beer and water and ammonia in the proportion of a pint of cold water to a teacupful of stout or porter in which as been dissolved a lump of salts of ammonia as big as a hazel nut (ref 53 - Cassell’s Household guide Vol II)

p37 
fireproof washes - sal ammnoiac or phosphate of ammonia, chloride of zinc, alum or borax and Epsom salts all in soln.  (The Ladies Treasury 1961


p81
oxalic acid to clean sraw hat - one  pennyworth in half a pint of boiling water. Home Notes ref 17 
p82 cut lemon dipped in sulphur. 
or place in vicinity of burning sulphur
hot water containing liquid ammonia, cloth wrung out and placed on hat. 
p83 felt hats = strong soln of ammonia or soda dissolved in water
dry cleaning agent such as Benzine collas (sic) to protect wearer from lingering fumes, wipe hat with clean damp sponge afterwards and dry it in the open air. 

white felt - past of magnesia and water, spread on and allowed to dry before being brushed off. 

p93 cleaning gloves - same processes and substance at professional cleaners as would be used at home but in conditions of greater danger. ‘ scrubbed with a small brush, soap and benzine; they are then rinsed in benzine and “made up” The Committee was informed p94 that this has been carried on in kitchens and small rooms where cooking was going on at the same time, and in rooms above the ground floor from which escape in case of fire would be sometimes impossible... In one place visited by the Commttee, the girls in the glove cleaning dept told that theat they had to come out for fresh air ‘pretty often’ and that the spirit got into their heads and made them ‘act silly’ “. ref 34 - Interim Report of the Departmental Committee appointed to Inquire into and Report upon certain Miscellaneous Trades C8149, 1896 quoted in E Royston Pike *Human Documents of the Age of the Forsytes* 1969


p95 insides of shoes benefited from a fortnightly sponging with ammonia, prevented offensive odours. 


p135 oxgall dissolved in a tub of rain water - rinse until the smell of ox-gall is removed. 
(this was a wollen item, dark)
soiled black coas could be sponged with strong coffee mixed with a few drops of ammonia, or a mixture made by compounding a wineglassful of spirits of truprntine with tsp of essential oil of lemon.” 
lighter coloured cloths - stale bread, fullers’ earth or magnesia could be applied to absorb grease though the latter is rather apt to leave a light trace behind.   (ref 18) 

p135 Men’s clothes - chlorofom - used on most delicate colours, effective, left no smell, but requires using with care and is expensive, sixpennyworth going but a very little way. Still it is a really first -class agent.” ref 20 

shiny black 0 do no want it to be shiny - sponge with hot tea and coffee, or rubbed hard with a cloth dipped in turpentine. Ammonia in a weak soln but is liable to turn the cloth brown. 
p137 remove gloss from back of worsted coats = would not tell me at first how he did it, but at last he told me he had used urine to rub it with. Whatever it may have been, whether the salt or ammonia contained in it, I know not, but certain it is that the gloss was entirely removed.   - Tailor and Cutter in 1879

p137 
patent revivers = “a decietful liquid, that blue and black reviver.... betrays its victims into a ateprary assumption iof importance... It elevates their spirits for a week, only to depress them, if possible, blow their original level. ... the transient dignity of the unhappy man decreased in exact proportion as the reviver wore off.”   Sketches by Boz, Dickens. 

MR GT Bousefield secured a patent for the mixture of: citric acid 300 grains, carbonate of potash 150 grains, water 7500 grains, citiric acid to be dissolved separately in 4500 grains of water and the caronate of potash in 3000. The whol ei sthn mixted to tether and appled with a sponge. V dilute solution of the muriate of in is a better mixture for this purpose than the citric acid and alkaline solution. After being applied and the stain remove, the spot is washed iwthwarm water. ‘The  Ladies Treasury’ 1875


p138 “Although the Vicotrian housewife was clearly prepared to use chemical compounds on occasion, she must often have preferred to stick to the plain soap and water method, which was ‘simple, inexpensive and unaccompanied with any of the risks of injuring the colour incidental to the use of chemicals, and should be always tried before resorting to the more powerful agents which often injure both the colour and fabric of the garment.’ Tailer and Cutter 1889 

p148 
Victorian houswife had an advantage over her modern counterpart, for no ony could she identify the barbirc but in an age when obth foodstuffs and household substances were produced from nown natural producs she could also readily identify the stain. 

p149
grease spots - chlorofom, or [common] salt dissolved in alcohol
spirits of wine, naptha or dile  [sal?] ammonia. 
magnesia powder rubbed well in and allowed to dry said to brush off. 

p153
for a lady who had spilt port on her cream serge dress, a more conservative method was to soak the garment in parazone and then wash it. [ no capitalisation, but think this is branding - parazone the bleach - appendix seems to concur]

p154
kerosene - soak garment stained with apple or pear juice
or sponge with ammonia
bleach out with sulphur - smoke of a burning sulphur match

p155 oxalic acid or solution of salts of lemon will remove ink or wine stains from any fabric ref 21  Enquire Within 1893

p156 - marking ink used to inial underwear and household linen - contained silver nitarate and removal recommende by The Queen 186 was to dissolve it with potassium cyanide - evidently easy to obtain from a chemist or photographer, but the writer adds the proviso ‘ as it is a deadly poison, the bottle containin the soln sould be put out of reach.’ Cassel’s Household Guid - chemical explanation
 first method is to convert the silver into an iodid by applying to the stain spirits of wine in which iodine has been disolved. Iodide of silver then removed by a soln of hyposulphite of soda. Or wet the stains with chloride of lime, then dip in either soln of hyposulphite of soda or in soln of ammonia. 
 
 p157 
 iron mould
 The Queen 1867  - wet the stain and heat the linen on a plate held over boiling water while sponging the stain with a small quantty of essential salts of lemon. OR tartaric acid and powdered salts of sorrel (i.e. oxalic acid): ‘wet the spot with water, dip your finger into the powder, or put a small qunatity to the spot, rub it gently and the ink or ironmould will entirely disappear without the least damage to the lace, lawn, muslin etc’. 
 
 muriatic acid - remove rust marks - wet a cork with the acid and touch the iron rust. Immediately the spot turns bright yellow. Dip at once in hot water and the stain will disappear. When all spots have been removed, rinse throughly in several waters, and then in ammonia water (a tablespoon of household ammonia to a quart of water) and finally in clear water. the acid is v powerful and will destroy the fabric if allowed to remain upon it. Ammonia neutralises it” ref 30  Home Notes 1894
 
 p159 remove mud by wiping marks with water in which a little carbonate of soda has been dissolved. Cassell’s Household Guide. 
 
 all pupose stain remover - good sized bottle with a big mouth to drop small pieces of soap (avoid waste) add ammonia, saltpetre and warm water in about the porpoirtion of a tablespoor on each of the former and a quart of the latter to each pint of the soap and there will be a mixture excellent for cleaning paint, taking grease from clothing and many similar pursposes. 
 
 fig leaves - like rhubarb are rich in oxalic acid. 
 
Hartshorn - ammonia - no longer available for general sale. original source of ammonia was hte calcined horns of the hart. 
 
 cream of tartar - calcium phosphate
 
 copperas - sulphate of iron, aka green vitriol. 
 corrosive sublimate - mercuric chloride
 sugar of lead - lead acetate
 spirits of wine - alcohol
 spirits of salts - hydrochloric acid
 magnesia powder - fine white powder (magnesium oxide)
 
 parazone - chlorine bleach
 pearl ash - potassium carbonate
 pipeclay  - Kaolin. 
 sal ammonic - ammonium chloride
 salts of lemon - equal parts citric acid and cream of tartar
 sal volatile - ammonium carbonate. 
 
 
 Still doesn’t deal with bicarbonate of soda, or cleaning interiors/ surfaces other than fabrics. 