Baking soda

Daily Express 21 Nov 1936 p13
San Francisco
City warns wives of mass murder plot
thousands have bought poison in baking soda
800lbs sold - 1 man and 2 women dead, 9 ill. Newspaper and radio warning issued to the 2000 housewives who it is feared have death on their kitchen shelves. A spoonful of the poisoned baking soda is fatal. 
Salvage company, made from broken packages of a nationally known brand of soda, repacked in barrels before being sold. 
labour agitators 
Communists
200 pounds worth of arsenic which was at the warehouse at the same time has disappeared. 

Daily Mirror 21 Nov 1935 p 4
“Mass Murder” Plot feared
San fancisoc
arsenic trioxide fluorine a deadly poison
stuff is too well mixed for it to be accidental. 
all possible users of baking soda have been warned by wireless and through the newspapers not to touch the powder. It is estimated that at least 400 families in San fransiso have bought wauntities of the powder. 


[quite different reporting styles, both in who the users of the baking soda are and what kidn of details are given. They are not the same at all]

**Daily express 19 Mar 1935**
Practical Page for Spring Cleaners
woman’s share of the task of Brightening Britain for the Jubliee Year...
you find yourself in a muddle of buckets and brooms, steps and chairs and feel - despairing. 

* meths to clean glass. 
* gilt frame sponged with soda soln - 1 tbs baking soda to a pint of water
* wipe plush velvet with a rag dipped in weak soln of vinegar and warm water
* clean discoloured baths with parafin and powdered whiteneing. Rub until stain is removed. 
* fill up insect holes in wood with peroxide of hydrogen for  a week. 
* usual method of cleaning out the greasy interior of an iron oven with a strong solution of soda and water is a tiresome job. There is also the snag that if not dried very throughly the soda eats away  more than it should part of the oven wall surface. There is a preparation in the form of a jelly which can be spread over the greasy parts at night and then forgotten until next morning when you wipe it off. All the grease will have gone and the ven will be seet and clean. take care not to get the stuff on your hands though. It is liable to cause the to tingle a bit. 
New deodorant for bin - not names, very cheap. disinfects. 

Daily Express Nov 22 1935 p 11
Mass Murder Discovery
Two poisons in soda
A maniac with expert knowledge of chemistry was sought
800lbs baking soda .2000 people bought it, 23 are dead. 
Not reasonable to think that poisons could have found their way into the soda barrels acccidentally. Combination of the two poisons, Aresenic and fluoriden, difficult to detect even after quantitiative tests. One poison helps to obscure the other. 

Daily Express Nov 13 1939
evacuated, use materials at hand (beauty) 
greasy skinned people can put handful of borax in hard water, normal skins benfit by handful of baking soda insead. If cold or rheumatism use Epsom salt as your bath softener. Sulphur milk - tsp sulphur into half a cup of hot milk, leave for a few hours then pour off the milk into another cup. put it into your skin with cotton wool or a handkerchief pad. Kitchen salt to take stains off teeth.

The daily mirror April 6 1940 p 13
French - when wash glasses rinse in wam water with a bit of wasing blue. 
When silver is tarnished don’t rub it with metal polishes . If it is plate, it will come off. Get hot water and a tsp baking soda and a tsp salt for every pint. Stand silver in it until tarnish has disappeared - hey presto! Wash in warm sopay water rinse andn dry. 
Advertiser’s announcment - gossip hints tips and usefu things to know by molly montague - seems to be to send away for a sample of some kind of rheumatism cure. 

Daiy Mirror p 9 27 Feb 1941
Supper with the Browns...
Baking soda - spoil the green vegetables . 
Never tell family what they’re going to eat, don’t be apologetic about it. Let them enjoy it then tell them. Don’t give bad news over a meal, or on a empty stomach. 

Daily Mirror JAn 21 1952 p8
Keep baby’s fair hair, do not use baking soda - too drying - on a baby’s head. 

Daily Mirror Feb 1 1955 p3
The kitchen cure that doctors use. Indigestion. Drs prescribe it as sodicum bicarbonate in many of their poweders lozengers and medcies. 

Daily Mirror May 30 1960 p 8
Monday in America  Stan Mays 
Howard S Cohoon (Gohoon?) is on his way to europe asking for help. AS director of Homemaker’s Forum he encourages housewives to speka out about household hints. Wants to learn tips from Britains women in exchange for American ideas. 
Some samples - tennisball over pantbursh handle to catch drips when paintin ceiling
boil dishclothes in baking soda to get rid of mustry smell. 

[The Courier News (Arkansas) 10 April 1956 p3 Ladies: Here's a Sure Cure For 'Housekeeping Blues' By DOROTHY ROE Whenever I get the blues, I can cheer myself up immediately by being thankful that I am not married to a man whose business is household efficiency. Can you imagine how awful it would be, for instance, to have as a husband the publisher of a women's service magazine, who comes home every night with new suggestions for improving your own fumbling .household routine? A man who spends his working day among time and motion experts and antiseptic test kitchens and experts in every field of homemaking? I should think it would give any wife a lifelong inferiority complex to be married to a man who knows more about housekeeping than she does. Such a man, for instance, as Howard S. Cohoon, of Jackson, Miss., who is head of a company which makes numerous household products, and who has worked up homemaker's forum inviting women all over the country to send in household hints. Now don't get me wrong. Cohoon is a charming gentleman, with an attractive wife and a happy family consisting of son, daughter and two' grandchildren. I am told that Mrs. Cohoon shows no signs of the complexes which I am sure would harrass me if I were in her shoes. She even encourages her husband to give prizes, such as trips to Florida, for the homemakers who send in the best hints. All I can say is she must be a paragon among women, and she must run the most efficient household in the world. While chatting with homemaking expert Cohoon over lunch in New York the other day, I learned that he now has a roster of more than a half million women who have sent in their most prized household hints for his consideration. "They come in at the rate of about 20,000 a month," said Cohoon. "We invite women to send in these hints over various radio and television programs, in newspapers and magazines and on the labels of the products. "It's amazing how many bright ideas for short cuts and thrift arrive by every mail. And what surprises me is how many brand new ideas keep coming in. You'd think after a while they'd already have thought of everything. But there are fewer repetitions than you would think possible." Cohoon and his cohorts will take 40 winning homemakers and their husbands for a week's free vacation in Elliuor Village, Fla. in June. "My wife thinks it's only fair” says he, "that housewives be rewarded for their bright ideas, just as employes in other businesses get rewards for bright suggestions. When I first brought up this idea to Mrs. Cohoon, she was delighted. In fact, she produced a few household hints of her own that nobody else had thought of." I guess, when you have to compete with a half million expert homemakers. you simply have to top them. And that, perhaps, is Mrs. Cohoon's secret.]

Daily Express Sept 13 1961 p2
This is America
REad up your drill on shelters and fallout says Kennedy - victims of radiation should wash skin and hair asap, first aid for radiation sikness is to take hot tea or a son of baking soda to combat nausea and asprin for fever. 

Daily Mirror Nov 1 1961 p19
Back to Beauty Shirly Lewis
FAshion - low backlines. If back is oily add a drying agent such as bath salts or 2 tsp of baking soda to daily bath. 

Daily Mirror Sept 16 1971 p9
How to choose your baby’s sex - Ronald Bedford Mirror Science Editor
want a boy use baking soda, douche befor eevery love act (this is different to the other articles I think inc penetration details). Dr Landrum Shettless. 

Daily Mirror Jan 27 1972
Wilson camping anecdote

Daily Express Feb 21 1974 p11
MArilyn could never forgive Laurence Olivier
for sugesting her teth looked a bit yellow, hinting that baking soda and lemon would whiten them. 

Sunday Express 29 Jul 1979
Holiday improvising
bicarbonated of soda, baking soda for sunburn iin bath water

Dail Express May 15 1981
Songs of courage
Sheila Rossal, allergy to twentieth Century. 
Bristol drs gave her 10 days to live. weighed 3stone 12lb 
total allergy syndrome, processed foods, synthetics, plastics made her vomit and heat from tv and the phone caused her face to swell. Lives in sterile atmosphere, filtered air, walls tiled and germ free, nurses wear special makeup and no perfume. Wild game and organically grown fruit and veg. Clothes cleaned in special process using baking soda instead of detergents. Needs money. One day Sheila must retuen to Bristol and live in allergy proof detached home. Rosemary Percival, the flat we lavished money on in Clifton fitted with air filters, is useless as needs detached house. Shelea written two songs, about hope and optimism. Sang with Picketty witch.  

		[New Pickettywitch, died Blackpool Nov 02 2006 - cancer/ long illness/ mental illness, nursing home]
		
Sunday Express Nov 29 1981 p7
Advert for Prevention Magazine
December issue - reports on what it means to crave bizarre foods. inc baking soda. 

Daily Express Mar 12 1984 p9
It may just be mud but to Fannie it’s a meal.  Mike PArry.
addicted to eating mud. Mississippi. 
dirt eating become a taboo. Some hardened eaters have weane dhtemselves onto packaged raw corn starch or baking soda which hasa similar texture. 

Daily Mirror May 14 1987 p 13 
Another nasty and dangerous uS drug craze is heading for britain. Its a crumbly white substance called crack, a mix of cocaine baking soda and water. And it is very dangerous says drug expert Ellen orehouse. It causes the heart to beat at a very fast rate - a youngster could become addicted in weeks. John Blake’s white hot club  (like 3am girls)

Daily Express Feb 4 1988  p10
Healthline
skin complaints - work in London, half a cup helps in some cases. 

Daily express 23 Jan 1989 p1/2
Crack Peril hits Britain
Graham dudman and sue johnson
most addictive ever known. 
Daily Express investigation revealed that the scale of the menace sweeping through deprived inner city areas is far greater than police first feated. 
schoochildren spending heavily, financing it by prostitution. 
Jamaican Yardies control crack factries
1987 had seen 3 incidences - Detective Chief Superintendetn Derek Todd head of Scotland Tard central drug sqyad. early 1988 becan to hear murmurings, didn’t actually see any. During last 4 mongths has started to surface. serious statistic. 

resulting whit e misture is dried and craced into small chips - hence the name - and sold as ‘rocks’ for about 20 making it one of the cheapes drugs on the market. Cocaine flooding into Britain, easily converted. Immedately hooked, drugs barons raise price. instantly addictive. 
p2 last year Britains first convicted crack dealer jailed for 7yrs. Merseyside 
In American children as young as 12 are willing to die for their next fix. One refored addict told how he was driven to attempt suicide after dabbling briefly with  the drug. Major report tomorrow. 

Scones, short pastry, ginger bread, etc