11Oct 1930 Daily Express p4
washing soda for insect wounds/ bites
	then goes onto say or sodium bicarbonate

Daily Mirror OCt 24 1930
	Beauty fromHerbs
	barely sugar cure from acidosis - Harley St Drs
	pearly white teeth - new prepareation on the market, whitens as if by magic. Touch your teeth by means of a little padded stick which is packed with the bottle of magic and afterwards you must rinse the mouth with a wash made by dissolving a tiny bicarbonate of soda tablet in water. 
	
Daily Express April 29 1932
	Boots insist that every drug must pass tesets like these before they will sell it to you ...
	verbose half page descriptive advert - would like to have it - Maybe HAT?

Daily Express Mar 3 1933
Another half page advert from Boots - Double saftey qualified doctors - why not tested medicines? 

Daily Express Jun 27 1933
Quarter page ad from Boots
tested purity, effective
from simple bicarbonate of soa that you buy by the pennyworth. 3 illustrations of male scientists at work testing products. 

Dily mirror Jul 4 1933
Ad for Icefoam Lemon cubes
foaming lemon drink - 

removal of heat marks - put bicarb on, leave, then polish with good polish - does not say paste, or dry for bciarb

clean rubber sponges (make up? some kind of beauty thing) with bicarbonate of soda  dissovled in tepid water, leave for couple of hours then rinse.  1933

adenaline will be as generally known and used as bicarbonate of soda [is] 1933 August 28 Daily Express p9

Daily Express Sep 27 1933 p 11
Englishman in Paris Drug Mystery
Heroin haul just soda
Inquiries in London failed to reveal any trace of a man who is said to have figured in a drug mystery in PAris. 20 boxes labelled ‘Heroin’ containing 110lbs white powder were seized in an orange and lemon dealer’s shop by detectives of the Paris antidrug squad. There was an invoice with one of the boxes stating that the considgnment was to go to London in the West end for re export to an address in Boradway NY. Propreitor of the shop retired sea captain Filetti Arrago
“Ha ha” laughed Captain Arrago. “It is all a practical joke. The boxes do not contain heroin at all. The powder is bicarbonate of soda. My customer is an Englishman with a sense of humour. You know what Englishmen are! He wanted to pla a practical joke on a firned in America and asked me to send him these boxes labelled heroin but with bicarbonate of soda in the so that he could send them to his friends in NY and play a trick on them.” The detectives examined the powder and sure enough it was bicarbonate of soda. This id d not prevent them however from detaining the captain and taking him to the police station for among some old boots and lemon peel at the back of the shop the detectives it is alleged found 35lbs of opium - real opium! 

Daily Mirror June 19 1934 p4
Drought has silver lining - Pit water helps wives reduce tea costs. 
Rochdale 0 buyng less tea. Not to save water, but because of bicarbonate of soda in the water which makes the tea brown very quickly. No stronger than if made with ordinary water.
pscyhological effect, need to use less tea. The water is from a supply from a mine shat, tested, not harmful. 

May 10 1939 Daily Mirror P27
Stainless Wives 0 advert from Scrubbs Cloudy Ammonia - spring cleaning beceomes easy. 
like magic
using in the home for 4 gnerations
all good chemists grocers, stores et in 6d and 1/4 bottles. Write to CNP :td Dept for Free Booklet “Home Hints”

Daily Express OCt 13 1939 Woman’s page p9
Start a war on waste
Make your own knife powder - put some coffee groudns in the oven and dry thoroughly. ttThen add a little bicarbonate of soda. 

daily Express Sept 19 1941 p3
Making tea go further - Tablet firm fined 
Trefusa Lut Bramley Surrey analysed - 91%bicarb, did not increase strenght, darkened colour. Fine £5  tea did go firther and firm claimed it was doing a service by increasing tea ration. 

Daily Express Feb 17 1942
Milton the stable band of electorlitic sodium hypochlorite is sciences last word in hypchlrite. Use it daily. Against Quisling sneeze. 
Milton Proprietary Ltd.   (on same page about fake ‘egg’ powder being mostly flour with bicarb and dye) 


Searching for bicarbonate of soda OR sodium bicarbonate AND cleaning NOT stomach in the hope that I get fewer recipes for buns and cakes - only 26 results byt nothing particulalry new

Daily Express July 221 1939 p11 woman’s page
burnt on oven grease melts when you use Sco - magic oven cleaning powder. spotlessly clean
wonderful new
make specially and solely for cleaning cookers
does all the hard work withou fuss of smell 
easiest quickets cheapest and best way 
get a tine today at Woolworths

Daily Express April 10 1977
Smidege on shirt? Dabitoff - spots disappear with a single rub of the ever ready cleaning pad. Keep a bottle ready for action. Illustration of bottle. 

Daily Express April 14 1972
spring cleaning. Tips.
keep chrome shiny by rubbin over a damp cloth dipped in bicarbonate of soda. Leae to dry and polish off with soft duster

Clean your silver the way the canny frnch housewife does - with cigarette ash. 

Daily mirror MArch 7 1973 p 11
Polish up your  saveing - shop around with mary griffiths
spring cleaning
buy household cleaners now and beat VAT which will have to be paid on most of those things from April 1.   List some of the products now and  current prices. Whether you use money to save energy or use energy to save money depends on you. Becareful with household ammonia though, it is poisons. 
lists vinegar, amonia, linseet oil, turps, beeswax, bicarb, borax, paraffin, linseed oil, ighter fuel, borax and lavender oil. 
bicarb is only listed for cleaning silver - boil 3 mins in quart of water with tbs bicarb of sada nd walt. 
burnt pans - soak in cold water and sponful of borax. 
belach bred and pastry boards - equl parts salt and borax, rub with pumice stone. 

Matchless hints by Jenny Nisbet Daily Express Sept 18 1979 p15
Book of Household Hints “the best of helpful hints is now on its way to sellign a million in the States. Following our article on the author MAry Pinkham we asked for your tricks of the trade. Selection - 
sick on a carpet - cover area with bicarg, leave to dry and hoover following day. 
coating of bicarbonate of soda mixed iwth cold water as a lining to the overn. Cleaning the oven is easy aftwerwards. 

Daily Express  May 30 1979 p15
MAry Ellen Pinkham and mother Pearl Higginbotham - obsession with saving money. 
All any home needs to avoid wasting masses of money is a couple of obttles of cider, white vinegar, bleach, baking soda, cream of tartar, lemon juice and mayonaise. Deon’t ever buy a lot of expensive products in packages.” She urges us to read the product labels. The first ingredient listed in hair spray is alcohol. That will kill bugs. (she uses hair spray to shoot down gnats) lists deodorant recipe using bicarb. 

