Journal of Economic History
CHARM


forthcoming 

Motherhoods, Markets and Consumption. / O'Donohoe, Stephanie; Maclaran, Pauline; Hogg, Margaret; Martens, Lydia; Stevens, Lorna.
London : Routledge, 2013.

Cultural Perspectives on Representations of the Consumer
Maclaran, P., Hogg, M. & Bradshaw, A. 2013 Consumer Research Methods: Fitchett, J. and Davies, A. (eds), . Sage publications



From 
The subsiding sizzle of advertising history
Methodoligical and theoretical challenges in the post advertising age

Terrence Nevett’s, 1982 Advertising in Britain

While historical sociologists like Michael Schudson (1984) began to sound warnings about the increasing vilification of advertising, his call for nuanced and long-term analysis was largely ignored in favour of a viewpoint that identified advertising as a powerful shaper of what came to be understood as the “modern consciousness”. Unlike previous periods, the collective consciousness of this age saw ownership and consumption of material goods as an end in itself. 

advertising historians of the 1980s and 1990s saw advertising as a force through which the manipulative and consumerist identity of the modern age crafted itself onto world history. As an aid to the identification of this consciousness, content analysis came heavily to be relied upon in the pursuit of giving a “history-less” advertising industry its own history (Marchand, 1985, pp. 165-67, 206-34).

The semiotic paradigmOf paramount importance for the making of the “modernization” paradigm was the idea that the products of the industry, the advertisements themselves, could tell historians exactly what the industry intended to do with consumers and what the ad-smiths had achieved on their journey to create the modern consciousness. The idea to subject long-runs of magazine and newspaper advertisements to content analysis therefore came as an obvious methodological choice. The problem with this methodology, however, is that it can only produce data with regard to the hypotheses its users decided to develop, but it tends to make its users blind towards the assumptions that went into the hypotheses in the first place.


Content analysis, especially in its semiotic variety, therefore should be used in conjunction with other methods that the historical and social sciences offer. Rather than directly trying to infer from an advertisement how consumers and society were affected and changed by it, it is advisable for historians to use advertisements as sources to understand how advertisers aimed to present their product, in which market segment they wanted to position it, and which visual and textual means they employed over time. Advertisements need to be analysed within a full contextual embedding and with reference to competitor advertising strategies, the tone (i.e. social and political position) of the media vehicle it was found in, with regard to the marketing aims the client prescribed to the agency, and in relation to dominant psychological and advertising strategic models that would have been used by an agency during a specific era (Beard, 2010; Beard and Kluyeva, 2010; Canavan and Laird, 2010; Pope, 2003).

These flaws, however, should not distract from the fact that carefully conducted and methodologically sound content analysis, for example as presented by Leiss et al. (2005) and Richards et al. (2000), can yield remarkably important results. Leiss and his collaborators found that over the course of the twentieth century, advertisements tended to use fewer words and rely more on imagery. In addition, the group found that advertisements went through four stages, at which different aspects **(functional orsocial) and benefits (intrinsic or peripheral)** of a product were communicated to the consumer. **In general, advertisements between the 1880s and the 1920s tended to be rather wordy and stressed the use-value of a product. During the interwar years, advertisements shifted their focus away from the utility of a product and often presented it as a social icon, as a symbol for social status and position. From the 1940s, advertisements often personalized a product by connecting it to a famous actor or a well-known member of the social elite. This social-symbolic connection infused the product with glamour and individual romance. From the 1970s, advertisements increasingly signalled the lifestyle-setting which a particular product or brands was supposed to be associated with (Leiss et al., 2005, pp. 153-217)**. Similarly well-designed was Pollay’s, 1985 descriptive history of American print advertising between 1900 and 1980 (Pollay, 1985), in which he established that late twentieth-century American advertisements once again focussed on product attributes in the same way as had beenthe norm at the beginning of that century.  [is this global?]

Although there is renewed interest in advertising historical research among sociologists associated with Actor-Network Theory, like Franck Cochoy (1998) and Liz McFall (2004a), this interest has arguably not been able to draw on much work published by mainstream historians. 

historical research now tends to focus much more on the history of branding
 (Eckhardt, 2010; “A brief history of branding in China”, Journal of Macromarketing, Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 210-21.
 Fullerton and Low, 1994; Brands, brand management, and the brand manager system: a critical-historical evaluation”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 173-90.da Silva Lopes and Casson, 2007; “Entrepreneurship and the development of global brands”, Business History Review, Vol. 81, Winter, pp. 651-80.
da Silva Lopes and Duguid, 2010). Trademarks, Brands and Competitiveness, Routledge, London.

Historians need to see advertising not only in relation to individual consumer wealth and well-being, as has become standard in much of the research published today, but as part of a wider picture that largely functions at a global level and which is more than ever entangled in questions of global governance, national sovereignty, sustainable growth and social justice. 

Anthony, S. (2010), Public Relations and the Making of Modern Britain: Stephen Tallents and the Birth of a Progressive Media Profession, Manchester University Press, Manchester.

Belk, R. and Pollay, R. (1985), “Images of ourselves: the good life in twentieth-century magazine advertising”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 887-97.

Berg, M. and Clifford, H. (2007), “Selling consumption in the eighteenth century: advertising and the trade card in Britain and France”, Cultural and Social History, Vol. 4 No. 2, pp. 145-70.

Cronin, A.M. (2010), Advertising Myths: The Strange Half-Lives of Images and Commodities, Routledge, London.

Fletcher, W. (2008), Powers of Persuasion: The Inside Story of British Advertising, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Howell, M.C. and Prevenier, W. (2001), From Reliable Sources: An introduction To Historical Methods, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.

Kassarjian, H.H. (1977), “Content analysis in consumer research”, Journal of Consumer Research, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 8-18.

Kelly, A., Lawlor, K. and O’Donohoe, S. (2005), “Encoding advertisements: the creative perspective”, Journal of Marketing Management, Vol. 21 Nos 5/6, pp. 505-28.

Kline, S. and Botterill, J. (2009), “The privileged discourse: advertising as an interpretive key to the consumer culture”, in Howells, R. and Matson, R.W. (Eds), Using Visual Evidence, Open University Press, Maidenhead, pp. 170-94.

Kreshel, P. (1990), “John B. Watson at J. Walter Thompson: the legitimation of ‘science’ in advertising”, Journal of Advertising, Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 49-59.

Schwarzkopf, S. (2005), “They do it with mirrors: advertising and British Cold War consumer politics”, Contemporary British History, Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 133-50.

Witkowski, T.H. (2003), “Word War II poster campaigns: preaching frugality to American consumers”, Journal of Advertising, Vol. 32 No. 1, pp. 69-82.
