Emergence of Modern Marketing
Purposive Strategy or serendipity

looks at Reckitt and Colman
company structure of both companies was to hire directors from within the family. However, as the company matured they started to promote from within the company, those who showed promise to the directors board. 

p30
Reckitt directors - preserve traditional distribution though extensive network of grocers shops which had sold the company's household cleaning product. 
Reckitt's claimed to be the world's larger mfcr of black lead for domestic purposes. 
extended the product by developing liquid metal polish for brass and copper. 
Innovation was actually reverse engineering - found a similar product being used in Australia, so samples were analysed and then developed to be sold as Brasso. Not a massively fast turnaround - visited Aus in 1901, Brasso on market by 1905. 

Initially sold to railways, hospitals, hotels and large shops. 

p31
"silvo was similarly developed, the trade mark name acquired with the good will of a small business in liquidation. 

diversification continued after the war. Imitating proprietary pro ducted from smaller com pies lacking the marketing infrastructure, resources and connections. 1921 directors instructed Reckitt's chemists to replicate the formula for "dry clene" a window cleaning prep. Result was Windo, which changed in 1923 to Windolene when Reckitts acquired the trademark from a struggling company. [this is copied]

[This acquisition of trademarked names, or brands, is interesting, as it suggests that brand recognition can be quite fluid - although the brand was struggling does not necessarily tarnish future products, the consumer is perhaps not that attached, especially when a product is low profile. Contrast to Harpic - which they tried to reverse engineer, then decided that the existing brand recognition warranted an acquisition rather than a competition. Though wasn't there one that changed its name/logo substantially and nothing was said at all?]

Windolene was effective for cleaning enamel as well as glass, so travelling salesmen were asked to canvas grocers views on the potential for selling it as a bath and stove cleaner as well. Divided response, concern for competitiveness against Vim and Kleanoff (thought that was for inside oven?) by Lever, was followed by sampling among consumers in a limited number of towns. Windolene for cleaning windows was launched in 1927. [this is copied - but it contradicts the 1923 statement?] Windolene never made up more than 5% reckitts sales.

1923 Confirmed decision not to trade through chemists - management of transactions through 2 channels uneconomic.
Bath salts not Groceries, so not act on suggestion to look at changing the way existing products starch and blue were made to crystals or powder in order to add bath salts. 

Investigate moth prep, baking power, aluminium paint = all dead ends. 

Directors returned to suggestion of bath salts distribution, as no new products suggestions had come around. 

1925 directors were reconsidering chemists - could sell shampoo powders, cough emulsions and toilet preps 

p32
Breaking into chemists distribution chain needed radical marketing policies, this affected the way that the search for new products was conducted and a new Research Committee was created in 1927 to do this systematically. This included identifying companies for acquisition. 

1930 specific instruction from the directors to experiment with the comany's own products wo recommend uses other than the ones they are normally put.

research committee >> management committee and board of directors>> laboratory for expo >> technical committee analysed feasibility and costings >> tech and sales and advertising committee reported back to the research committee >> research committee >> board of dir for final decision. 

past success in distribution of cleaning products through grocers, and the increasingly "para-chemical" what does this mean? character of production, the Research Committee persuaded the reutn to question of car polish, lab cleaner and household disinfectant. 

Langthorp and Stabler of the Advertising dept, Resarch committee revived the bath salts idea - effervescing perfumed table in 1927.

1931 - chemists had a prep to compete with Harpic, and feasilibty of production was confirmd but
p33
Harpic's market position meant that it would be better bought and in 1932 it was. 

p36 Housewives Panel mentioned at Colmans - 
belated introduction of New Products Cte 1938 with HP had yet to bear fruit

Reckitt's 1st chemist was appointed 1894
mostly quality control but 1898 another one joined the team "purely for research work and saving of by-products"
14 chemists by 1914 - significant portion of internal research to improved existing products and experiments with new lines. 

Brasso shifted technical and research interests towards chemistry of cleaning fluids. 
1927 - proposed development of household disinfectant to be sold through grocers. 
1929 - Dr Reynolds moved from Jeyes to Reckitts with his germicidal formula
p37
1930 London Press Bureau and London Press Exchange were consulted on the market for disinfectants - - this is interesting, making use of these agencies to guide and shape their product and presentation. Haven't found mention of these agencies anywhere else though. 

Reckitts chemists had initially looked for a mild disinfectant with a more pleasant odour than ones already on the market - Jeyes and Lysol.

1928 acquisition of Suffolk Chem Co - seen as possible site of production

"Although we ourselves do not do much fundamental work, we are interested in the results of such work in diff fields and attempt to utilise these results where ever possible." 
no distinction between scientific and industrial research, but difference between fundamental and empirical research was 
Until pharmaceutical development in the 1930s, no distinction had been drawn between research and development, and chemistry applied to control. Started to separate as compilexity of co\s products increased and the specialisms required of scientists grew. ref 90

p42
starch and blue did not provide a good basis for stretching or developing. 
starch had been repositioned as foot powder for soldiers in 1914, but both failed. This was attributed by sales depts to grocers being the distributors, rather than chemists. 

polishes - better platform also shifted competence in increasingly complex industrial chemistry, and appointment of specialists.

polish to disinfectant is circuitous. 

In 1926, Australians reported the replacement of black lead stoves with enamel paint. UK financial assessment decided not to go down the paint route. Looked instead at changing the packaging and dispensing black lead from different containers. Newly formed Housewives' jury tested packet, liquid and tube lead. 

sales of lacquered and oxidised articles - blow to lead polish business. 
p43
metal polish grew though, in the 1930s more than a third of total UK sales fro the company. 

look to polishes for cars, floors and furniture - commitment demonstrated in 1925 by financing experimental work int eh lab of the Chiswick Polish Co. 

Karpol - 1930s was doing well, but coachwork finishes improved, garages stopped offering so many cleaning facilities (one of the major retailers) and it took the colour from paintwork. Was not able to modify to make it stuiable fro household paints, varnishes or fabric. 


Dettol - 
p45
1934 - place an observer in grocers shop and another in a chemist to monitor customer behaviour and preferences ref 144

awareness of other companies activities - impact on their own, bring events forward if ned - e.g.p 44 info about Lysol's intention to market a similar product, meant they launched theirs first. Also picked area well, marketing to medical professionals, and tied to government enquiry into maternal mortality leading to specific recommendations of Dettol. 
again p45 1937 Unilever introduced tablet form denture cleaner Dentabs, Reckitts plans for a tablet were brought forward

employees as testers - used strictly in accordance with directions, regular examinations of their dentures. 
46
while in-house consumer survey was useful, in 1938 the Research Committee agreed to abandon this method and replace it wtih 1000 women, none of whom should be Reckitt employees. ref 150 [ except that ref 150 is for 1937 - maybe it refers to future intentions ]

p47
1928 - Reckitts directors resolved to avoid tri-sodiumphosphate related new lines as they would be interpreted as conflicting wit Uni/Lever's interests
1929 - Lever complained that advertising Karpol as suitable for cleaning paint was entering Lever's territory. 
1931 - entered agreement of 15 yrs where Lever would not handle blues, starch or plashes and in return Reckitt undertook not to enter soap, soap powder, scourer or margarine trades. 

Expected actions of competitors - described as external environment influencing constraints on product diversification. Competition and collusion,.

p50
Employment of British Press Exchange to report on likely response of consumers to Dettol - showed change from reliance on salesmen to professional market researchers. 
Reckitt followed Lever and Colman in getting J Walter Thomson on board as marketing in the 1920s(??). 

Description of production oriented (functions, costs, machinery, labour/skills) and marketing oriented firms - 2 separate approaches

p51 consumer testing among employees "primitive" tho JWT reports may also be compiled like this, shows awareness of needing to satisfy consumers

describes an intermediate situation between production oriented and marketing oriented (2 extremes) - systematic searching did not begin with professionalised market research through market surveys taking consumers as starting point. Constrained by inherited resources and competencies, directed towards satisfying consumers perceived wants in addition to diversifying product base under competitive pressure. 
inheritance and reputation = persistence of lines as well as the **initiation** of lines
This was more important than reported consumer preferences.

p52
concludes that rational purposive stately and serendipity are both needed to explain the diversification. 


