175:6

Sanitary fluid
very much multiuse - hospitals kitchens larders
washion out stables, kennels & c
for washing dogs - heals sores, improvesa ppareance of coat, destroys all vermin
for fowls
for horses and other animals 
sheep and lamb dip
for scab
for destroing insects on plants rose trees & c add one pint to 12 gallons of water. use a syringe or watering pot. Best applied in the eve or morn when the sun has not much power. Plants should be syringed with clean water one hour after using the wash. 

When added to thte water it gies the appearance of milk
stir the mixture well before use. 



--------
EPH 175:5

odamine
fluide powder disinfectant
non poisonous
describes many different users or beneficiaries:
mothers - at peace where reg used
maidens - realise the seetness and purity of life at thome is grealy preseved 
fathers - welcome sanitary safeguard at home, abroad, in hotels , seaside lodgeings or in country quarters
lodgers - defy the carelessness of the landlady 
landlades - overcome insanitary habits of lodgers
farmers- cure disease and give health
dog owners
workhouse masters - cleanse buildings and purify inmates

-------------

EPH 175:24
colour leaflet
showing woman wearing bright white apron, hanging bright white sheets on the line 
Quite White!
Domestos, the safe way to bleach
illustration of brown glass bottle, with fluted sides, domestos in relief on top shoulder of bottle. 

The Safe Way to Bleach
envy - whiteness of professionally laundered linens
the professional is not afraid to bleach. He knows that bleaching is safe as houses *when it is done properly*. The natural bleach is sunshine, but we cannot rely upon sunshine and most of us have not the failities even on the brightes days to take this advantage of it, we must do the next best ting and use a bleach. "The professionsal touch"

best - never varies, strength is constant
if you used an eggcupful last washday you can safely use the same next time. 
better to be sure than sorry

costs less to use - stronger,
an eggcupful of domestos will bleach as big a wash as a cupful of common bleach. Bottle lasts much longer. 

only 2 things to remember - use the very small quantities recommended. mix well before puttin in the articles. 



Domestos - using eggcups as a measurement

tub (about 3 buckets or 6 gallons)

boiler (2 buckets or 4 gallons) 
