Bruce Brown
Images of Family Life in Magzine Advertising 1920 −1978
covers my time span - see if he’s referenced esp in studies of simlar in UK 

marketing research placed greater emphasis on the social psychological motivations of the consumer. More sophisticaed and scientific 
“no group of sociologists can approximate the ad teams in gathering and processing of exploitable social data. The ad teams have billions to spend annually on research and testing of reactions, and their products are magnificent accumualtions of material about the  shared experiences and feelings of the entire community.” McLuham 1971 *Understanding Media* p229

p12
“Utter strangeness is just as uninteresting as complete familiarity. Total strangeness leaves the average observer at a loss” Hepner 1941 *Effective advertising*p400

Advertising designed for mass consumption so advertiser not concerned w individual vualies - only values of the part of the popn comprising the largest segment of the buying public. Advertising can be said to reflect middle class cultural values. The shaping of cultural vlaues is left to the few in the business of selling who are “willing to undertake the risky assignment of changing and refining public taste” Baker *Visual Persuasion: The effect of pictures on the subconcious*1961

p13
consumer must be able to see self in the situation that the advertiser creates

although reflect and reinforce existing cultural values, ads do not reflect cultural reality. The common aspiration for what is depicted in ads is in itself a reflection of cultural values. 


Arguments for using magazine adverts
p15
ads reflect family life values - mags confomr to rather than transform cult values, sterilised images still provide information on family life values. 

ads avoid distorion
unobrusive nature of adverts mnimises distrtion in the sens that imagery gets away from recollection. - relying on the momoies of respondents for cultural values concerning familiy life at particular times in history is shaky at best. 
adversing phototgraphy can visually preserve values concerning cerain aspects of family life that are too personal , threatening or below concsiou level. 
advers are there, static and available for scrutin and rescrutiny at any time Millum 1975 *Images of Women* p53

p17
general interest magazines were selected rather than speicality mags, as would be more likely to reflect wider range of family life. Womens magas not included becaus as Courtney and Lockeretz 1971 *Journal of Marketing Research* 8 (1) 92-95 “A woman’s place: An analysis of the roles portrayed by women in magazine advertisements point out they are directed primarily towards women as housewives, whateve their other roles

p31
Wives - houshold tasks
regarless of the actual actiity the wife was depited beause the home operation was primarily her responsibility. She was there essentially to meet the needs of other family members. One gets the impression, by looking at their smiles, that these wives do their housework prompted by a loving concern for their husbands and children. 
proportion of ads depicting wives involved inhouseowrk has decreased significantly since 1920, not consitent. Peak in 1920 - remnants of Victorian era with emphasis on domesticity as a mark of the true woman. Other peak years were 1945 an 1960 - poss indication of nation’s desire to retun to normalcy after WW2 and Korean War. (USA - this study)

Nye’s (1976 *Role STructure and analysis of the family*) assertion that housekeeping is a declining family role, contrary to the fact that wives continu to spend as many hours per week on hw as they did at turn of the century desite tech advances in appliances. Devaluing of hw role, ‘just a housewife’ lack of prestige

p32 stages - Lopata 1966 learnign to become a houswife, internalise the role as self concept. advertings perform important service at preparental family life cycle stage.  Analiss of sample shows decrease most evident for first 3 family life cycle stages (preparental, children under 6, ch under and over six) It is the younger wife in particular whose role in housework has decreased in coverage in magazine advertising.  

p36 recreational activities of wives
shift wotards acceptance of leisure as a legitimate life goal. low point occurred during Depression years - frivolous.  (p34)
home-bound activitys - reading, knitting, gardening
1975- shift to more active recreations - hiking tennis camping fishing swimming (women’s movement, back to nature fad)

number of children found t have inverse effect on wives depicted in recreational activities. Inverse effects of increasing no children over the family lifecycle may be offset by the increased freedom wives experience as they relinquish childcare responsibilities as children grow older. 

husbands and household tasks
p38 rarely pictred doing housework, often portrayed as inept (Goffman 1976) bumbling husband - houseowkd not seen as integral part of husbands role. Hw has been such an integral part of wifes role, cultural values similar to wives actual behaviour are rhesitant to allow husbands to become to inovleved in what is essentially considered women’s work. 
p40 recreation - low in Depression yrs 31-36 frivolous and irresponsible. greates emphasis on recreation when all ch are over 6, both spouses have increased time and freedom for recreation. 
p41 Until 1960 husbands were portrayed in more sedentary forms of recreatsion - gardning, listening to radio, viewing tv. After, morelikely to be biking, playing tennis, skiiing sailing camping etc. 
p42 - indicative of emphasis on physical fitness? started during Kennedy years
earlier than women (1975) indicative of notion that men more athletic than women. recreation more impt component of husbands role. 

companionship

have taken photocopies of relevant appendices and graphs 

Journal of popular culture 7 (2) 264-79 Holder Stephen 1973 family magazine and the American people

*Advertising’s role in society* 1974 Wright and Mertes eds