Good books
1975
p179
for family/ children
Biology of the Future
more awe inspiring even frightening developments - organ transpalnts test tube babies, brain investigation the prolonging of human life and forecases of some of the tremendous decisionsour children or our chilren’s children may evenually ahve to make. 

David Person’s Tomorrrow’s World vol3 takes the smae approach into an even wider field - into energy and transport for instance and our alarming squandering of the earth’s natuarl resources. 

p88(text)-89 (pics) 
p228-229 half page each flanked by ads. 
p230 half page

Living off the land - is the pleaseure worth the slog?
John Seymour frowns on the intesnive factory farming of today. “Once you start interering with the balance of nature, you may find yourself liek a dog chasing its tail. By carefully rotating the crops and the animals, I find I don’t need to use pesticides - and anyway, they’re very expensive.
The animals all enjoy good heath: “We hardly ever need a vet and I’m sure it’s because I refuse to feed them on artificial foods. Its the same with the family - we’re literally never ill, and it mus be because we lead such a healthy life and eat good, natral foods.”
John and Sally hav lived for 19 yrs on the fat of the land - cut out for self-sufficiency
continued p230
Pete and Chris Cossingham
“We believe in growing things organically” says Chris. “We belong to the Henry Doubleday Research association and they supply us with books leaflets and organic pestiides.”

The Self Reliance Newsletter is issuesd by Colin Richardson 29 Dartmouth Ave Huddersfield - annual subscription £1  bi monthly - isn’t only sent to families and communities who are practicing rural self sufficiency in varying degees, it also finds a readership in towns anmong those trying to beat rising prices by cultivating what vegetables time and space allow. 
Self-Sufficney by John Seymour Faber and Faber 2.95  sold out in its first year and was reprinted ina second edition within only a few months . Agricultural college, then worked in Africa for 12 yrs, lived in the bush. Bought/lived on a boat. toured waterways of Europe. Then got 5acre smallholding in Suffolk. 
Henry doubleday Research Assoc 20 Convent land, bocking, braintree essex. 



advert for womancraft new monthly diy mag


rainbow is a hoze, blacka dn decker is tools


1975 December
Gardening column - gift ideas  p131
It’s the giving season
Learn to love your weeds says the soil association and full of good will, i’m going to treat myself to a year’s subscription to this charity which devotes itself to promoting organic methods of growing. It issues its own magazine and sells a fascinating booklet  “The Value of Weeds” which would make a good stockign filler for a garder
ICI’s new easy spray on glosser Kerishine for houseplants. A canister costs 69p

the othersrs are flower scissors, mushroom packs, staryberry tubes, pygme water lillies, flower preserving kit, gardeing gloves, water meter, shears, tools. 



