The Hidden Persuaders

American, but will probably have a lot of impact on British advertising too 
Probably take in conjunction with the other book that I haven't read yet. 

Dr dichter
sell emotional security - 
not selling shoes - selling nice feet

Selling self images - 


Secret miseries and self doubt - guilt, fears, anxieties, hostilities, loneliness feelings inner tensions. 

Self indulgent and easy-does-it products - cake mixes, labour saving appliances - but americans still puriatns at heart. 
Dr Dichter
have to assuage buyer's guilt feelings every time an indulgent/easy product is sold

dreamy faces in fag ads all wrong - smokers know they need to smoke most when under pressure

many reasons people continue to smoke despite guilt feelings about the habit - applicable to other actions/ products

express soicability, proof of conformity, accustomed ritual etc

p60 candy - guilt - 
	emphasise bite size pieces = permission to buy as facilitate 'in moderation', 
	reward yourself
	
	cough-drop = permissable form of candy, rather than medicine
	
	
	p62 wives instead of being grateful for these wonderful boons, reacted in may cases by viewing them as threats to their creativeness and usefulness. Workign wives could welcome these short cut products but regular housewives shoed unexpected resistance. 
	"If you tell the whouseiwfe that by using our washing machine appliances  she can be free to play bridge, you're dead! The housewife today to a certain extent is disinfranchised; she is already feeling guilty about the fact that she's not working as hard a s her mother. You are just rubbing her the wrong way when you offer her more freedom. Instead you should emphasize that the appliances will free her to have more time with her children and to be a better mother"
	unease - Jell-o sales did not increase when exciting, attractive images of complex Jello creations were used as advertising.
	p63 housewives felt a vague sense of inferiotiry when they saw the beautiful creations advertised. They wondered if they would fail if they tried to duplicate it and they resented the idea of someone watching over their showlder and saying It's got to look like this. So many started saying to themselves wehn they saw a Jell-o ad "Well if I've got to go to all that trouble I might as well make my own dessert."
	returned to simple dessert w/o fancy trimmings
	
	
	
	p70
	Loneliness - Dr Harry Stack Sullivan - most unbearable of all human emotions
		greetings card company - understand why people buy cards, who they are, why certain images are popular - e.g barren, gnarled tree on windswept / snow covered hill
		key factor is loneliness - most frequent buyers - widows spinsteras and divorcees who feel gnarled and lonely. freudian analysis turned up the fact that many oft he more sucessful greeting cards were loaded with sexual symbolism = artistic moons, candles, ovals, circles. Help to desgin more popular cards. 
	
	
	